BOOK XX.



CHAPTER I. How Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred were busy upon Sir Gawaine
for to disclose the love between Sir Launcelot and Queen Guenever.


IN May when every lusty heart flourisheth and bourgeoneth, for as the
season is lusty to behold and comfortable, so man and woman rejoice and
gladden of summer coming with his fresh flowers: for winter with his
rough winds and blasts causeth a lusty man and woman to cower and sit
fast by the fire. So in this season, as in the month of May, it befell
a great anger and unhap that stinted not till the flower of chivalry of
all the world was destroyed and slain; and all was long upon two unhappy
knights the which were named Agravaine and Sir Mordred, that were
brethren unto Sir Gawaine. For this Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred had
ever a privy hate unto the queen Dame Guenever and to Sir Launcelot, and
daily and nightly they ever watched upon Sir Launcelot.

So it mishapped, Sir Gawaine and all his brethren were in King Arthur's
chamber; and then Sir Agravaine said thus openly, and not in no counsel,
that many knights might hear it: I marvel that we all be not ashamed
both to see and to know how Sir Launcelot lieth daily and nightly by the
queen, and all we know it so; and it is shamefully suffered of us all,
that we all should suffer so noble a king as King Arthur is so to be
shamed.

Then spake Sir Gawaine, and said: Brother Sir Agravaine, I pray you and
charge you move no such matters no more afore me, for wit you well, said
Sir Gawaine, I will not be of your counsel. So God me help, said Sir
Gaheris and Sir Gareth, we will not be knowing, brother Agravaine, of
your deeds. Then will I, said Sir Mordred. I lieve well that, said Sir
Gawaine, for ever unto all unhappiness, brother Sir Mordred, thereto
will ye grant; and I would that ye left all this, and made you not so
busy, for I know, said Sir Gawaine, what will fall of it. Fall of it
what fall may, said Sir Agravaine, I will disclose it to the king. Not
by my counsel, said Sir Gawaine, for an there rise war and wrack betwixt
Sir Launcelot and us, wit you well brother, there will many kings and
great lords hold with Sir Launcelot. Also, brother Sir Agravaine, said
Sir Gawaine, ye must remember how ofttimes Sir Launcelot hath rescued
the king and the queen; and the best of us all had been full cold at the
heart-root had not Sir Launcelot been better than we, and that hath he
proved himself full oft. And as for my part, said Sir Gawaine, I will
never be against Sir Launcelot for one day's deed, when he rescued me
from King Carados of the Dolorous Tower, and slew him, and saved my
life. Also, brother Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, in like wise Sir
Launcelot rescued you both, and threescore and two, from Sir Turquin.
Methinketh brother, such kind deeds and kindness should be remembered.
Do as ye list, said Sir Agravaine, for I will lain it no longer. With
these words came to them King Arthur. Now brother, stint your noise,
said Sir Gawaine. We will not, said Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred. Will
ye so? said Sir Gawaine; then God speed you, for I will not hear your
tales ne be of your counsel. No more will I, said Sir Gareth and Sir
Gaheris, for we will never say evil by that man; for because, said Sir
Gareth, Sir Launcelot made me knight, by no manner owe I to say ill of
him: and therewithal they three departed, making great dole. Alas, said
Sir Gawaine and Sir Gareth, now is this realm wholly mischieved, and
the noble fellowship of the Round Table shall be disparpled: so they
departed.



CHAPTER II. How Sir Agravaine disclosed their love to King Arthur, and
how King Arthur gave them licence to take him.


AND then Sir Arthur asked them what noise they made. My lord, said
Agravaine, I shall tell you that I may keep no longer. Here is I, and
my brother Sir Mordred, brake unto my brothers Sir Gawaine, Sir Gaheris,
and to Sir Gareth, how this we know all, that Sir Launcelot holdeth
your queen, and hath done long; and we be your sister's sons, and we
may suffer it no longer, and all we wot that ye should be above Sir
Launcelot; and ye are the king that made him knight, and therefore we
will prove it, that he is a traitor to your person.

If it be so, said Sir Arthur, wit you well he is none other, but I would
be loath to begin such a thing but I might have proofs upon it; for
Sir Launcelot is an hardy knight, and all ye know he is the best knight
among us all; and but if he be taken with the deed, he will fight with
him that bringeth up the noise, and I know no knight that is able to
match him. Therefore an it be sooth as ye say, I would he were taken
with the deed. For as the French book saith, the king was full loath
thereto, that any noise should be upon Sir Launcelot and his queen; for
the king had a deeming, but he would not hear of it, for Sir Launcelot
had done so much for him and the queen so many times, that wit ye well
the king loved him passingly well. My lord, said Sir Agravaine, ye shall
ride to-morn a-hunting, and doubt ye not Sir Launcelot will not go with
you. Then when it draweth toward night, ye may send the queen word that
ye will lie out all that night, and so may ye send for your cooks, and
then upon pain of death we shall take him that night with the queen, and
outher we shall bring him to you dead or quick. I will well, said the
king; then I counsel you, said the king, take with you sure fellowship.
Sir, said Agravaine, my brother, Sir Mordred, and I, will take with us
twelve knights of the Round Table. Beware, said King Arthur, for I warn
you ye shall find him wight. Let us deal, said Sir Agravaine and Sir
Mordred.

So on the morn King Arthur rode a-hunting, and sent word to the queen
that he would be out all that night. Then Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred
gat to them twelve knights, and hid themself in a chamber in the Castle
of Carlisle, and these were their names: Sir Colgrevance, Sir Mador
de la Porte, Sir Gingaline, Sir Meliot de Logris, Sir Petipase of
Winchelsea, Sir Galleron of Galway, Sir Melion of the Mountain, Sir
Astamore, Sir Gromore Somir Joure, Sir Curselaine, Sir Florence, Sir
Lovel. So these twelve knights were with Sir Mordred and Sir Agravaine,
and all they were of Scotland, outher of Sir Gawaine's kin, either
well-willers to his brethren.

So when the night came, Sir Launcelot told Sir Bors how he would go that
night and speak with the queen. Sir, said Sir Bors, ye shall not go
this night by my counsel. Why? said Sir Launcelot. Sir, said Sir Bors,
I dread me ever of Sir Agravaine, that waiteth you daily to do you shame
and us all; and never gave my heart against no going, that ever ye went
to the queen, so much as now; for I mistrust that the king is out this
night from the queen because peradventure he hath lain some watch for
you and the queen, and therefore I dread me sore of treason. Have ye no
dread, said Sir Launcelot, for I shall go and come again, and make no
tarrying. Sir, said Sir Bors, that me repenteth, for I dread me sore
that your going out this night shall wrath us all. Fair nephew, said Sir
Launcelot, I marvel much why ye say thus, sithen the queen hath sent
for me; and wit ye well I will not be so much a coward, but she shall
understand I will see her good grace. God speed you well, said Sir Bors,
and send you sound and safe again.



CHAPTER III. How Sir Launcelot was espied in the queen's chamber, and how Sir
Agravaine and Sir Mordred came with twelve knights to slay him.


SO Sir Launcelot departed, and took his sword under his arm, and so in
his mantle that noble knight put himself in great Jeopardy; and so he
passed till he came to the queen's chamber, and then Sir Launcelot was
lightly put into the chamber. And then, as the French book saith, the
queen and Launcelot were together. And whether they were abed or at
other manner of disports, me list not hereof make no mention, for love
that time was not as is now-a-days. But thus as they were together,
there came Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, with twelve knights with them
of the Round Table, and they said with crying voice: Traitor-knight, Sir
Launcelot du Lake, now art thou taken. And thus they cried with a loud
voice, that all the court might hear it; and they all fourteen were
armed at all points as they should fight in a battle. Alas said Queen
Guenever, now are we mischieved both Madam, said Sir Launcelot, is there
here any armour within your chamber, that I might cover my poor body
withal? An if there be any give it me, and I shall soon stint their
malice, by the grace of God. Truly, said the queen, I have none armour,
shield, sword, nor spear; wherefore I dread me sore our long love is
come to a mischievous end, for I hear by their noise there be many noble
knights, and well I wot they be surely armed, and against them ye may
make no resistance. Wherefore ye are likely to be slain, and then shall
I be brent. For an ye might escape them, said the queen, I would not
doubt but that ye would rescue me in what danger that ever I stood in.
Alas, said Sir Launcelot, in all my life thus was I never bestead, that
I should be thus shamefully slain for lack of mine armour.

But ever in one Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred cried: Traitor-knight,
come out of the queen's chamber, for wit thou well thou art so beset
that thou shalt not escape. O Jesu mercy, said Sir Launcelot, this
shameful cry and noise I may not suffer, for better were death at once
than thus to endure this pain. Then he took the queen in his arms, and
kissed her, and said: Most noble Christian queen, I beseech you as ye
have been ever my special good lady, and I at all times your true poor
knight unto my power, and as I never failed you in right nor in wrong
sithen the first day King Arthur made me knight, that ye will pray for
my soul if that I here be slain; for well I am assured that Sir Bors,
my nephew, and all the remnant of my kin, with Sir Lavaine and Sir Urre,
that they will not fail you to rescue you from the fire; and therefore,
mine own lady, recomfort yourself, whatsomever come of me, that ye go
with Sir Bors, my nephew, and Sir Urre, and they all will do you all the
pleasure that they can or may, that ye shall live like a queen upon my
lands. Nay, Launcelot, said the queen, wit thou well I will never live
after thy days, but an thou be slain I will take my death as meekly for
Jesu Christ's sake as ever did any Christian queen. Well, madam, said
Launcelot, sith it is so that the day is come that our love must
depart, wit you well I shall sell my life as dear as I may; and a
thousandfold, said Sir Launcelot, I am more heavier for you than for
myself. And now I had liefer than to be lord of all Christendom, that I
had sure armour upon me, that men might speak of my deeds or ever I were
slain. Truly, said the queen, I would an it might please God that they
would take me and slay me, and suffer you to escape. That shall never
be, said Sir Launcelot, God defend me from such a shame, but Jesu be
Thou my shield and mine armour!



CHAPTER IV. How Sir Launcelot slew Sir Colgrevance, and armed him in his
harness, and after slew Sir Agravaine, and twelve of his fellows.


AND therewith Sir Launcelot wrapped his mantle about his arm well and
surely; and by then they had gotten a great form out of the hall, and
therewithal they rashed at the door. Fair lords, said Sir Launcelot,
leave your noise and your rashing, and I shall set open this door, and
then may ye do with me what it liketh you. Come off then, said they
all, and do it, for it availeth thee not to strive against us all; and
therefore let us into this chamber, and we shall save thy life until
thou come to King Arthur. Then Launcelot unbarred the door, and with his
left hand he held it open a little, so that but one man might come in
at once; and so there came striding a good knight, a much man and large,
and his name was Colgrevance of Gore, and he with a sword struck at Sir
Launcelot mightily; and he put aside the stroke, and gave him such a
buffet upon the helmet, that he fell grovelling dead within the chamber
door. And then Sir Launcelot with great might drew that dead knight
within the chamber door; and Sir Launcelot with help of the queen and
her ladies was lightly armed in Sir Colgrevance's armour.

And ever stood Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred crying: Traitor-knight,
come out of the queen's chamber. Leave your noise, said Sir Launcelot
unto Sir Agravaine, for wit you well, Sir Agravaine, ye shall not prison
me this night; and therefore an ye do by my counsel, go ye all from this
chamber door, and make not such crying and such manner of slander as ye
do; for I promise you by my knighthood, an ye will depart and make no
more noise, I shall as to-morn appear afore you all before the king,
and then let it be seen which of you all, outher else ye all, that will
accuse me of treason; and there I shall answer you as a knight should,
that hither I came to the queen for no manner of mal engin, and that
will I prove and make it good upon you with my hands. Fie on thee,
traitor, said Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, we will have thee maugre
thy head, and slay thee if we list; for we let thee wit we have the
choice of King Arthur to save thee or to slay thee. Ah sirs, said Sir
Launcelot, is there none other grace with you? then keep yourself.

So then Sir Launcelot set all open the chamber door, and mightily and
knightly he strode in amongst them; and anon at the first buffet he slew
Sir Agravaine. And twelve of his fellows after, within a little while
after, he laid them cold to the earth, for there was none of the twelve
that might stand Sir Launcelot one buffet. Also Sir Launcelot wounded
Sir Mordred, and he fled with all his might. And then Sir Launcelot
returned again unto the queen, and said: Madam, now wit you well all our
true love is brought to an end, for now will King Arthur ever be my
foe; and therefore, madam, an it like you that I may have you with me,
I shall save you from all manner adventures dangerous. That is not best,
said the queen; meseemeth now ye have done so much harm, it will be best
ye hold you still with this. And if ye see that as to-morn they will put
me unto the death, then may ye rescue me as ye think best. I will well,
said Sir Launcelot, for have ye no doubt, while I am living I shall
rescue you. And then he kissed her, and either gave other a ring; and so
there he left the queen, and went until his lodging.



CHAPTER V. How Sir Launcelot came to Sir Bors, and told him how he had
sped, and in what adventure he had been, and how he had escaped.


WHEN Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot he was never so glad of his home-coming
as he was then. Jesu mercy, said Sir Launcelot, why be ye all armed:
what meaneth this? Sir, said Sir Bors, after ye were departed from us,
we all that be of your blood and your well-willers were so dretched that
some of us leapt out of our beds naked, and some in their dreams caught
naked swords in their hands; therefore, said Sir Bors, we deem there is
some great strife at hand; and then we all deemed that ye were betrapped
with some treason, and therefore we made us thus ready, what need that
ever ye were in.

My fair nephew, said Sir Launcelot unto Sir Bors, now shall ye wit all,
that this night I was more harder bestead than ever I was in my life,
and yet I escaped. And so he told them all how and in what manner, as
ye have heard to-fore. And therefore, my fellows, said Sir Launcelot, I
pray you all that ye will be of good heart in what need somever I stand,
for now is war come to us all. Sir, said Bors, all is welcome that God
sendeth us, and we have had much weal with you and much worship, and
therefore we will take the woe with you as we have taken the weal. And
therefore, they said all (there were many good knights), look ye take no
discomfort, for there nis no bands of knights under heaven but we shall
be able to grieve them as much as they may us. And therefore discomfort
not yourself by no manner, and we shall gather together that we love,
and that loveth us, and what that ye will have done shall be done. And
therefore, Sir Launcelot, said they, we will take the woe with the weal.
Grant mercy, said Sir Launcelot, of your good comfort, for in my great
distress, my fair nephew, ye comfort me greatly, and much I am beholding
unto you. But this, my fair nephew, I would that ye did in all haste
that ye may, or it be forth days, that ye will look in their lodging
that be lodged here nigh about the king, which will hold with me, and
which will not, for now I would know which were my friends from my foes.
Sir, said Sir Bors, I shall do my pain, and or it be seven of the clock
I shall wit of such as ye have said before, who will hold with you.

Then Sir Bors called unto him Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir
Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Gahalantine, Sir
Galihodin, Sir Galihud, Sir Menadeuke Sir Villiers the Valiant, Sir
Hebes le Renoumes, Sir Lavaine Sir Urre of Hungary, Sir Nerounes, Sir
Plenorius. These two knights Sir Launcelot made, and the one he won upon
a bridge, and therefore they would never be against him. And Harry le
Fise du Lake, and Sir Selises of the Dolorous Tower, and Sir Melias
de Lile, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse, that was Sir Alisander's son Le
Orphelin, because his mother Alice le Beale Pellerin and she was kin
unto Sir Launcelot, and he held with him. So there came Sir Palomides
and Sir Safere, his brother, to hold with Sir Launcelot, and Sir
Clegis of Sadok, and Sir Dinas, Sir Clarius of Cleremont. So these
two-and-twenty knights drew them together, and by then they were armed
on horseback, and promised Sir Launcelot to do what he would. Then there
fell to them, what of North Wales and of Cornwall, for Sir Lamorak's
sake and for Sir Tristram's sake, to the number of a fourscore knights.

My lords, said Sir Launcelot, wit you well, I have been ever since I
came into this country well willed unto my lord, King Arthur, and unto
my lady, Queen Guenever, unto my power; and this night because my
lady the queen sent for me to speak with her, I suppose it was made by
treason, howbeit I dare largely excuse her person, notwithstanding I was
there by a forecast near slain, but as Jesu provided me I escaped all
their malice and treason. And then that noble knight Sir Launcelot told
them all how he was hard bestead in the queen's chamber, and how and in
what manner he escaped from them. And therefore, said Sir Launcelot, wit
you well, my fair lords, I am sure there nis but war unto me and mine.
And for because I have slain this night these knights, I wot well, as
is Sir Agravaine Sir Gawaine's brother, and at the least twelve of his
fellows, for this cause now I am sure of mortal war, for these knights
were sent and ordained by King Arthur to betray me. And therefore the
king will in his heat and malice judge the queen to the fire, and that
may I not suffer, that she should be brent for my sake; for an I may be
heard and suffered and so taken, I will fight for the queen, that she is
a true lady unto her lord; but the king in his heat I dread me will not
take me as I ought to be taken.



CHAPTER VI. Of the counsel and advice that was taken by Sir Launcelot
and his friends for to save the queen.


MY lord, Sir Launcelot, said Sir Bors, by mine advice ye shall take the
woe with the weal, and take it in patience, and thank God of it. And
sithen it is fallen as it is, I counsel you keep yourself, for an ye
will yourself, there is no fellowship of knights christened that shall
do you wrong. Also I will counsel you my lord, Sir Launcelot, than an
my lady, Queen Guenever, be in distress, insomuch as she is in pain for
your sake, that ye knightly rescue her; an ye did otherwise, all the
world will speak of you shame to the world's end. Insomuch as ye were
taken with her, whether ye did right or wrong, it is now your part to
hold with the queen, that she be not slain and put to a mischievous
death, for an she so die the shame shall be yours. Jesu defend me from
shame, said Sir Launcelot, and keep and save my lady the queen from
villainy and shameful death, and that she never be destroyed in my
default; wherefore my fair lords, my kin, and my friends, said Sir
Launcelot, what will ye do? Then they said all: We will do as ye will
do. I put this to you, said Sir Launcelot, that if my lord Arthur by
evil counsel will to-morn in his heat put my lady the queen to the fire
there to be brent, now I pray you counsel me what is best to do. Then
they said all at once with one voice: Sir, us thinketh best that ye
knightly rescue the queen, insomuch as she shall be brent it is for your
sake; and it is to suppose, an ye might be handled, ye should have the
same death, or a more shamefuler death. And sir, we say all, that ye
have many times rescued her from death for other men's quarrels, us
seemeth it is more your worship that ye rescue the queen from this
peril, insomuch she hath it for your sake.

Then Sir Launcelot stood still, and said: My fair lords, wit you well I
would be loath to do that thing that should dishonour you or my blood,
and wit you well I would be loath that my lady, the queen, should die a
shameful death; but an it be so that ye will counsel me to rescue her,
I must do much harm or I rescue her; and peradventure I shall there
destroy some of my best friends, that should much repent me; and
peradventure there be some, an they could well bring it about, or
disobey my lord King Arthur, they would soon come to me, the which I
were loath to hurt. And if so be that I rescue her, where shall I keep
her? That shall be the least care of us all, said Sir Bors. How did the
noble knight Sir Tristram, by your good will? kept not he with him La
Beale Isoud near three year in Joyous Gard? the which was done by your
alther device, and that same place is your own; and in likewise may ye
do an ye list, and take the queen lightly away, if it so be the king
will judge her to be brent; and in Joyous Gard ye may keep her long
enough until the heat of the king be past. And then shall ye bring again
the queen to the king with great worship; and then peradventure ye shall
have thank for her bringing home, and love and thank where other shall
have maugre.

That is hard to do, said Sir Launcelot, for by Sir Tristram I may have
a warning, for when by means of treaties, Sir Tristram brought again
La Beale Isoud unto King Mark from Joyous Gard, look what befell on
the end, how shamefully that false traitor King Mark slew him as he sat
harping afore his lady La Beale Isoud, with a grounden glaive he thrust
him in behind to the heart. It grieveth me, said Sir Launcelot, to speak
of his death, for all the world may not find such a knight. All this is
truth, said Sir Bors, but there is one thing shall courage you and
us all, ye know well King Arthur and King Mark were never like of
conditions, for there was never yet man could prove King Arthur untrue
of his promise.

So to make short tale, they were all consented that for better outher
for worse, if so were that the queen were on that morn brought to the
fire, shortly they all would rescue her. And so by the advice of
Sir Launcelot, they put them all in an embushment in a wood, as nigh
Carlisle as they might, and there they abode still, to wit what the king
would do.



CHAPTER VII. How Sir Mordred rode hastily to the king, to tell him of
the affray and death of Sir Agravaine and the other knights.


NOW turn we again unto Sir Mordred, that when he was escaped from the
noble knight, Sir Launcelot, he anon gat his horse and mounted upon him,
and rode unto King Arthur, sore wounded and smitten, and all forbled;
and there he told the king all how it was, and how they were all slain
save himself all only. Jesu mercy, how may this be? said the king; took
ye him in the queen's chamber? Yea, so God me help, said Sir Mordred,
there we found him unarmed, and there he slew Colgrevance, and armed him
in his armour; and all this he told the king from the beginning to the
ending. Jesu mercy, said the king, he is a marvellous knight of prowess.
Alas, me sore repenteth, said the king, that ever Sir Launcelot should
be against me. Now I am sure the noble fellowship of the Round Table is
broken for ever, for with him will many a noble knight hold; and now
it is fallen so, said the king, that I may not with my worship, but the
queen must suffer the death. So then there was made great ordinance in
this heat, that the queen must be judged to the death. And the law was
such in those days that whatsomever they were, of what estate or degree,
if they were found guilty of treason, there should be none other remedy
but death; and outher the men or the taking with the deed should be
causer of their hasty judgment. And right so was it ordained for Queen
Guenever, because Sir Mordred was escaped sore wounded, and the death of
thirteen knights of the Round Table. These proofs and experiences caused
King Arthur to command the queen to the fire there to be brent.

Then spake Sir Gawaine, and said: My lord Arthur, I would counsel you
not to be over-hasty, but that ye would put it in respite, this judgment
of my lady the queen, for many causes. One it is, though it were so that
Sir Launcelot were found in the queen's chamber, yet it might be so that
he came thither for none evil; for ye know my lord, said Sir Gawaine,
that the queen is much beholden unto Sir Launcelot, more than unto any
other knight, for ofttimes he hath saved her life, and done battle for
her when all the court refused the queen; and peradventure she sent for
him for goodness and for none evil, to reward him for his good deeds
that he had done to her in times past. And peradventure my lady, the
queen, sent for him to that intent that Sir Launcelot should come to her
good grace privily and secretly, weening to her that it was best so to
do, in eschewing and dreading of slander; for ofttimes we do many things
that we ween it be for the best, and yet peradventure it turneth to the
worst. For I dare say, said Sir Gawaine, my lady, your queen, is to you
both good and true; and as for Sir Launcelot, said Sir Gawaine, I dare
say he will make it good upon any knight living that will put upon
himself villainy or shame, and in like wise he will make good for my
lady, Dame Guenever.

That I believe well, said King Arthur, but I will not that way with Sir
Launcelot, for he trusteth so much upon his hands and his might that he
doubteth no man; and therefore for my queen he shall never fight more,
for she shall have the law. And if I may get Sir Launcelot, wit you well
he shall have a shameful death. Jesu defend, said Sir Gawaine, that I
may never see it. Why say ye so? said King Arthur; forsooth ye have
no cause to love Sir Launcelot, for this night last past he slew your
brother, Sir Agravaine, a full good knight, and almost he had slain
your other brother, Sir Mordred, and also there he slew thirteen noble
knights; and also, Sir Gawaine, remember you he slew two sons of yours,
Sir Florence and Sir Lovel. My lord, said Sir Gawaine, of all this I
have knowledge, of whose deaths I repent me sore; but insomuch I gave
them warning, and told my brethren and my sons aforehand what would fall
in the end, insomuch they would not do by my counsel, I will not meddle
me thereof, nor revenge me nothing of their deaths; for I told them
it was no boot to strive with Sir Launcelot. Howbeit I am sorry of the
death of my brethren and of my sons, for they are the causers of their
own death; for ofttimes I warned my brother Sir Agravaine, and I told
him the perils the which be now fallen.



CHAPTER VIII. How Sir Launcelot and his kinsmen rescued the queen from
the fire, and how he slew many knights.


THEN said the noble King Arthur to Sir Gawaine: Dear nephew, I pray you
make you ready in your best armour, with your brethren, Sir Gaheris and
Sir Gareth, to bring my queen to the fire, there to have her judgment
and receive the death. Nay, my most noble lord, said Sir Gawaine, that
will I never do; for wit you well I will never be in that place where so
noble a queen as is my lady, Dame Guenever, shall take a shameful end.
For wit you well, said Sir Gawaine, my heart will never serve me to see
her die; and it shall never be said that ever I was of your counsel of
her death.

Then said the king to Sir Gawaine: Suffer your brothers Sir Gaheris and
Sir Gareth to be there. My lord, said Sir Gawaine, wit you well they
will be loath to be there present, because of many adventures the which
be like there to fall, but they are young and full unable to say you
nay. Then spake Sir Gaheris, and the good knight Sir Gareth, unto Sir
Arthur: Sir, ye may well command us to be there, but wit you well
it shall be sore against our will; but an we be there by your strait
commandment ye shall plainly hold us there excused: we will be there
in peaceable wise, and bear none harness of war upon us. In the name
of God, said the king, then make you ready, for she shall soon have her
judgment anon. Alas, said Sir Gawaine, that ever I should endure to see
this woful day. So Sir Gawaine turned him and wept heartily, and so
he went into his chamber; and then the queen was led forth without
Carlisle, and there she was despoiled into her smock. And so then her
ghostly father was brought to her, to be shriven of her misdeeds. Then
was there weeping, and wailing, and wringing of hands, of many lords and
ladies, but there were but few in comparison that would bear any armour
for to strength the death of the queen.

Then was there one that Sir Launcelot had sent unto that place for to
espy what time the queen should go unto her death; and anon as he saw
the queen despoiled into her smock, and so shriven, then he gave Sir
Launcelot warning. Then was there but spurring and plucking up of
horses, and right so they came to the fire. And who that stood against
them, there were they slain; there might none withstand Sir Launcelot,
so all that bare arms and withstood them, there were they slain, full
many a noble knight. For there was slain Sir Belliance le Orgulous,
Sir Segwarides, Sir Griflet, Sir Brandiles, Sir Aglovale, Sir Tor;
Sir Gauter, Sir Gillimer, Sir Reynolds' three brethren; Sir Damas, Sir
Priamus, Sir Kay the Stranger, Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Herminde;
Sir Pertilope, Sir Perimones, two brethren that were called the Green
Knight and the Red Knight. And so in this rushing and hurling, as Sir
Launcelot thrang here and there, it mishapped him to slay Gaheris and
Sir Gareth, the noble knight, for they were unarmed and unware. For as
the French book saith, Sir Launcelot smote Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris
upon the brain-pans, wherethrough they were slain in the field; howbeit
in very truth Sir Launcelot saw them not, and so were they found dead
among the thickest of the press.

Then when Sir Launcelot had thus done, and slain and put to flight all
that would withstand him, then he rode straight unto Dame Guenever, and
made a kirtle and a gown to be cast upon her; and then he made her to
be set behind him, and prayed her to be of good cheer. Wit you well the
queen was glad that she was escaped from the death. And then she thanked
God and Sir Launcelot; and so he rode his way with the queen, as the
French book saith, unto Joyous Gard, and there he kept her as a noble
knight should do; and many great lords and some kings sent Sir Launcelot
many good knights, and many noble knights drew unto Sir Launcelot.
When this was known openly, that King Arthur and Sir Launcelot were at
debate, many knights were glad of their debate, and many were full heavy
of their debate.



CHAPTER IX. Of the sorrow and lamentation of King Arthur for the death
of his nephews and other good knights, and also for the queen, his wife.


SO turn we again unto King Arthur, that when it was told him how and in
what manner of wise the queen was taken away from the fire, and when he
heard of the death of his noble knights, and in especial of Sir Gaheris
and Sir Gareth's death, then the king swooned for pure sorrow. And when
he awoke of his swoon, then he said: Alas, that ever I bare crown upon
my head! for now have I lost the fairest fellowship of noble knights
that ever held Christian king together. Alas, my good knights be slain
away from me: now within these two days I have lost forty knights, and
also the noble fellowship of Sir Launcelot and his blood, for now I may
never hold them together no more with my worship. Alas that ever this
war began. Now fair fellows, said the king, I charge you that no man
tell Sir Gawaine of the death of his two brethren; for I am sure, said
the king, when Sir Gawaine heareth tell that Sir Gareth is dead he will
go nigh out of his mind. Mercy Jesu, said the king, why slew he Sir
Gareth and Sir Gaheris, for I dare say as for Sir Gareth he loved Sir
Launcelot above all men earthly. That is truth, said some knights, but
they were slain in the hurtling as Sir Launcelot thrang in the thick of
the press; and as they were unarmed he smote them and wist not whom
that he smote, and so unhappily they were slain. The death of them, said
Arthur, will cause the greatest mortal war that ever was; I am sure,
wist Sir Gawaine that Sir Gareth were slain, I should never have rest
of him till I had destroyed Sir Launcelot's kin and himself both, outher
else he to destroy me. And therefore, said the king, wit you well my
heart was never so heavy as it is now, and much more I am sorrier for
my good knights' loss than for the loss of my fair queen; for queens I
might have enow, but such a fellowship of good knights shall never be
together in no company. And now I dare say, said King Arthur, there was
never Christian king held such a fellowship together; and alas that ever
Sir Launcelot and I should be at debate. Ah Agravaine, Agravaine, said
the king, Jesu forgive it thy soul, for thine evil will, that thou and
thy brother Sir Mordred hadst unto Sir Launcelot, hath caused all this
sorrow: and ever among these complaints the king wept and swooned.

Then there came one unto Sir Gawaine, and told him how the queen was led
away with Sir Launcelot, and nigh a twenty-four knights slain. O Jesu
defend my brethren, said Sir Gawaine, for full well wist I that Sir
Launcelot would rescue her, outher else he would die in that field; and
to say the truth he had not been a man of worship had he not rescued the
queen that day, insomuch she should have been brent for his sake. And
as in that, said Sir Gawaine, he hath done but knightly, and as I would
have done myself an I had stood in like case. But where are my brethren?
said Sir Gawaine, I marvel I hear not of them. Truly, said that man, Sir
Gareth and Sir Gaheris be slain. Jesu defend, said Sir Gawaine, for
all the world I would not that they were slain, and in especial my good
brother, Sir Gareth. Sir, said the man, he is slain, and that is great
pity. Who slew him? said Sir Gawaine. Sir, said the man, Launcelot slew
them both. That may I not believe, said Sir Gawaine, that ever he slew
my brother, Sir Gareth; for I dare say my brother Gareth loved him
better than me, and all his brethren, and the king both. Also I dare
say, an Sir Launcelot had desired my brother Sir Gareth, with him he
would have been with him against the king and us all, and therefore I
may never believe that Sir Launcelot slew my brother. Sir, said this
man, it is noised that he slew him.



CHAPTER X. How King Arthur at the request of Sir Gawaine concluded to
make war against Sir Launcelot, and laid siege to his castle called
Joyous Gard.


ALAS, said Sir Gawaine, now is my joy gone. And then he fell down and
swooned, and long he lay there as he had been dead. And then, when he
arose of his swoon, he cried out sorrowfully, and said: Alas! And right
so Sir Gawaine ran to the king, crying and weeping: O King Arthur, mine
uncle, my good brother Sir Gareth is slain, and so is my brother Sir
Gaheris, the which were two noble knights. Then the king wept, and he
both; and so they fell a-swooning. And when they were revived then spake
Sir Gawaine: Sir, I will go see my brother, Sir Gareth. Ye may not see
him, said the king, for I caused him to be interred, and Sir Gaheris
both; for I well understood that ye would make over-much sorrow, and
the sight of Sir Gareth should have caused your double sorrow. Alas,
my lord, said Sir Gawaine, how slew he my brother, Sir Gareth? Mine own
good lord I pray you tell me. Truly, said the king, I shall tell you how
it is told me, Sir Launcelot slew him and Sir Gaheris both. Alas, said
Sir Gawaine, they bare none arms against him, neither of them both. I
wot not how it was, said the king, but as it is said, Sir Launcelot slew
them both in the thickest of the press and knew them not; and therefore
let us shape a remedy for to revenge their deaths.

My king, my lord, and mine uncle, said Sir Gawaine, wit you well now I
shall make you a promise that I shall hold by my knighthood, that from
this day I shall never fail Sir Launcelot until the one of us have slain
the other. And therefore I require you, my lord and king, dress you to
the war, for wit you well I will be revenged upon Sir Launcelot;
and therefore, as ye will have my service and my love, now haste you
thereto, and assay your friends. For I promise unto God, said Sir
Gawaine, for the death of my brother, Sir Gareth, I shall seek Sir
Launcelot throughout seven kings' realms, but I shall slay him or else
he shall slay me. Ye shall not need to seek him so far, said the king,
for as I hear say, Sir Launcelot will abide me and you in the Joyous
Gard; and much people draweth unto him, as I hear say. That may I
believe, said Sir Gawaine; but my lord, he said, assay your friends, and
I will assay mine. It shall be done, said the king, and as I suppose I
shall be big enough to draw him out of the biggest tower of his castle.

So then the king sent letters and writs throughout all England, both in
the length and the breadth, for to assummon all his knights. And so unto
Arthur drew many knights, dukes, and earls, so that he had a great host.
And when they were assembled, the king informed them how Sir Launcelot
had bereft him his queen. Then the king and all his host made them
ready to lay siege about Sir Launcelot, where he lay within Joyous Gard.
Thereof heard Sir Launcelot, and purveyed him of many good knights, for
with him held many knights; and some for his own sake, and some for
the queen's sake. Thus they were on both parties well furnished and
garnished of all manner of thing that longed to the war. But King
Arthur's host was so big that Sir Launcelot would not abide him in the
field, for he was full loath to do battle against the king; but Sir
Launcelot drew him to his strong castle with all manner of victual, and
as many noble men as he might suffice within the town and the castle.
Then came King Arthur with Sir Gawaine with an huge host, and laid a
siege all about Joyous Gard, both at the town and at the castle, and
there they made strong war on both parties. But in no wise Sir Launcelot
would ride out, nor go out of his castle, of long time; neither he would
none of his good knights to issue out, neither none of the town nor of
the castle, until fifteen weeks were past.



CHAPTER XI. Of the communication between King Arthur and Sir Launcelot,
and how King Arthur reproved him.

THEN it befell upon a day in harvest time, Sir Launcelot looked over
the walls, and spake on high unto King Arthur and Sir Gawaine: My lords
both, wit ye well all is in vain that ye make at this siege, for here
win ye no worship but maugre and dishonour; for an it list me to come
myself out and my good knights, I should full soon make an end of
this war. Come forth, said Arthur unto Launcelot, an thou durst, and
I promise thee I shall meet thee in midst of the field. God defend me,
said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should encounter with the most noble
king that made me knight. Fie upon thy fair language, said the king,
for wit you well and trust it, I am thy mortal foe, and ever will to my
death day; for thou hast slain my good knights, and full noble men of
my blood, that I shall never recover again. Also thou hast lain by my
queen, and holden her many winters, and sithen like a traitor taken her
from me by force.

My most noble lord and king, said Sir Launcelot, ye may say what ye
will, for ye wot well with yourself will I not strive; but thereas ye
say I have slain your good knights, I wot well that I have done so, and
that me sore repenteth; but I was enforced to do battle with them in
saving of my life, or else I must have suffered them to have slain me.
And as for my lady, Queen Guenever, except your person of your highness,
and my lord Sir Gawaine, there is no knight under heaven that dare make
it good upon me, that ever I was a traitor unto your person. And where
it please you to say that I have holden my lady your queen years and
winters, unto that I shall ever make a large answer, and prove it upon
any knight that beareth the life, except your person and Sir Gawaine,
that my lady, Queen Guenever, is a true lady unto your person as any is
living unto her lord, and that will I make good with my hands. Howbeit
it hath liked her good grace to have me in chierte, and to cherish me
more than any other knight; and unto my power I again have deserved her
love, for ofttimes, my lord, ye have consented that she should be brent
and destroyed, in your heat, and then it fortuned me to do battle for
her, and or I departed from her adversary they confessed their untruth,
and she full worshipfully excused. And at such times, my lord Arthur,
said Sir Launcelot, ye loved me, and thanked me when I saved your queen
from the fire; and then ye promised me for ever to be my good lord; and
now methinketh ye reward me full ill for my good service. And my good
lord, meseemeth I had lost a great part of my worship in my knighthood
an I had suffered my lady, your queen, to have been brent, and insomuch
she should have been brent for my sake. For sithen I have done battles
for your queen in other quarrels than in mine own, meseemeth now I had
more right to do battle for her in right quarrel. And therefore my good
and gracious lord, said Sir Launcelot, take your queen unto your good
grace, for she is both fair, true, and good.

Fie on thee, false recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine; I let thee wit my
lord, mine uncle, King Arthur, shall have his queen and thee, maugre thy
visage, and slay you both whether it please him. It may well be, said
Sir Launcelot, but wit you well, my lord Sir Gawaine, an me list to come
out of this castle ye should win me and the queen more harder than ever
ye won a strong battle. Fie on thy proud words, said Sir Gawaine; as for
my lady, the queen, I will never say of her shame. But thou, false and
recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine, what cause hadst thou to slay my
good brother Sir Gareth, that loved thee more than all my kin? Alas thou
madest him knight thine own hands; why slew thou him that loved thee so
well? For to excuse me, said Sir Launcelot, it helpeth me not, but by
Jesu, and by the faith that I owe to the high order of knighthood, I
should with as good will have slain my nephew, Sir Bors de Ganis, at
that time. But alas that ever I was so unhappy, said Launcelot, that I
had not seen Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris.

Thou liest, recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine, thou slewest him in
despite of me; and therefore, wit thou well I shall make war to
thee, and all the while that I may live. That me repenteth, said Sir
Launcelot; for well I understand it helpeth not to seek none accordment
while ye, Sir Gawaine, are so mischievously set. And if ye were not, I
would not doubt to have the good grace of my lord Arthur. I believe it
well, false recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine; for thou hast many long
days overled me and us all, and destroyed many of our good knights. Ye
say as it pleaseth you, said Sir Launcelot; and yet may it never be said
on me, and openly proved, that ever I by forecast of treason slew no
good knight, as my lord, Sir Gawaine, ye have done; and so did I never,
but in my defence that I was driven thereto, in saving of my life. Ah,
false knight, said Sir Gawaine, that thou meanest by Sir Lamorak: wit
thou well I slew him. Ye slew him not yourself, said Sir Launcelot; it
had been overmuch on hand for you to have slain him, for he was one of
the best knights christened of his age, and it was great pity of his
death.



CHAPTER XII. How the cousins and kinsmen of Sir Launcelot excited him to
go out to battle, and how they made them ready.


WELL, well, said Sir Gawaine to Launcelot, sithen thou enbraidest me of
Sir Lamorak, wit thou well I shall never leave thee till I have thee at
such avail that thou shalt not escape my hands. I trust you well enough,
said Sir Launcelot, an ye may get me I get but little mercy. But as
the French book saith, the noble King Arthur would have taken his queen
again, and have been accorded with Sir Launcelot, but Sir Gawaine would
not suffer him by no manner of mean. And then Sir Gawaine made many
men to blow upon Sir Launcelot; and all at once they called him false
recreant knight.

Then when Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir Lionel, heard
this outcry, they called to them Sir Palomides, Sir Safere's brother,
and Sir Lavaine, with many more of their blood, and all they went unto
Sir Launcelot, and said thus: My lord Sir Launcelot, wit ye well we
have great scorn of the great rebukes that we heard Gawaine say to you;
wherefore we pray you, and charge you as ye will have our service, keep
us no longer within these walls; for wit you well plainly, we will ride
into the field and do battle with them; for ye fare as a man that were
afeard, and for all your fair speech it will not avail you. For wit you
well Sir Gawaine will not suffer you to be accorded with King Arthur,
and therefore fight for your life and your right, an ye dare. Alas, said
Sir Launcelot, for to ride out of this castle, and to do battle, I am
full loath.

Then Sir Launcelot spake on high unto Sir Arthur and Sir Gawaine: My
lords, I require you and beseech you, sithen that I am thus required and
conjured to ride into the field, that neither you, my lord King Arthur,
nor you Sir Gawaine, come not into the field. What shall we do then?
said Sir Gawaine, [N]is this the king's quarrel with thee to fight? and
it is my quarrel to fight with thee, Sir Launcelot, because of the
death of my brother Sir Gareth. Then must I needs unto battle, said Sir
Launcelot. Now wit you well, my lord Arthur and Sir Gawaine, ye will
repent it whensomever I do battle with you.

And so then they departed either from other; and then either party made
them ready on the morn for to do battle, and great purveyance was made
on both sides; and Sir Gawaine let purvey many knights for to wait upon
Sir Launcelot, for to overset him and to slay him. And on the morn at
underne Sir Arthur was ready in the field with three great hosts. And
then Sir Launcelot's fellowship came out at three gates, in a full good
array; and Sir Lionel came in the foremost battle, and Sir Launcelot
came in the middle, and Sir Bors came out at the third gate. Thus they
came in order and rule, as full noble knights; and always Sir Launcelot
charged all his knights in any wise to save King Arthur and Sir Gawaine.



CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Gawaine jousted and smote down Sir Lionel, and how
Sir Launcelot horsed King Arthur.


THEN came forth Sir Gawaine from the king's host, and he came before and
proffered to joust. And Sir Lionel was a fierce knight, and lightly he
encountered with Sir Gawaine; and there Sir Gawaine smote Sir Lionel
through out the body, that he dashed to the earth like as he had been
dead; and then Sir Ector de Maris and other more bare him into the
castle. Then there began a great stour, and much people was slain; and
ever Sir Launcelot did what he might to save the people on King Arthur's
party, for Sir Palomides, and Sir Bors, and Sir Safere, overthrew many
knights, for they were deadly knights. And Sir Blamore de Ganis, and Sir
Bleoberis de Ganis, with Sir Bellangere le Beuse, these six knights did
much harm; and ever King Arthur was nigh about Sir Launcelot to have
slain him, and Sir Launcelot suffered him, and would not strike again.
So Sir Bors encountered with King Arthur, and there with a spear Sir
Bors smote him down; and so he alighted and drew his sword, and said
to Sir Launcelot: Shall I make an end of this war? and that he meant to
have slain King Arthur. Not so hardy, said Sir Launcelot, upon pain of
thy head, that thou touch him no more, for I will never see that most
noble king that made me knight neither slain ne shamed. And therewithal
Sir Launcelot alighted off his horse and took up the king and horsed him
again, and said thus: My lord Arthur, for God's love stint this strife,
for ye get here no worship, and I would do mine utterance, but always I
forbear you, and ye nor none of yours forbeareth me; my lord, remember
what I have done in many places, and now I am evil rewarded.

Then when King Arthur was on horseback, he looked upon Sir Launcelot,
and then the tears brast out of his eyen, thinking on the great courtesy
that was in Sir Launcelot more than in any other man; and therewith the
king rode his way, and might no longer behold him, and said: Alas, that
ever this war began. And then either parties of the battles withdrew
them to repose them, and buried the dead, and to the wounded men they
laid soft salves; and thus they endured that night till on the morn. And
on the morn by underne they made them ready to do battle. And then Sir
Bors led the forward.

So upon the morn there came Sir Gawaine as brim as any boar, with a
great spear in his hand. And when Sir Bors saw him he thought to revenge
his brother Sir Lionel of the despite that Sir Gawaine did him the other
day. And so they that knew either other feutred their spears, and with
all their mights of their horses and themselves, they met together so
felonously that either bare other through, and so they fell both to the
earth; and then the battles joined, and there was much slaughter on
both parties. Then Sir Launcelot rescued Sir Bors, and sent him into the
castle; but neither Sir Gawaine nor Sir Bors died not of their wounds,
for they were all holpen. Then Sir Lavaine and Sir Urre prayed Sir
Launcelot to do his pain, and fight as they had done; For we see ye
forbear and spare, and that doth much harm; therefore we pray you spare
not your enemies no more than they do you. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, I
have no heart to fight against my lord Arthur, for ever meseemeth I do
not as I ought to do. My lord, said Sir Palomides, though ye spare them
all this day they will never con you thank; and if they may get you at
avail ye are but dead. So then Sir Launcelot understood that they said
him truth; and then he strained himself more than he did aforehand, and
because his nephew Sir Bors was sore wounded. And then within a little
while, by evensong time, Sir Launcelot and his party better stood, for
their horses went in blood past the fetlocks, there was so much people
slain. And then for pity Sir Launcelot withheld his knights, and
suffered King Arthur's party for to withdraw them aside. And then Sir
Launcelot's party withdrew them into his castle, and either parties
buried the dead, and put salve unto the wounded men.

So when Sir Gawaine was hurt, they on King Arthur's party were not so
orgulous as they were toforehand to do battle. Of this war was noised
through all Christendom, and at the last it was noised afore the
Pope; and he considering the great goodness of King Arthur, and of
Sir Launcelot, that was called the most noblest knights of the world,
wherefore the Pope called unto him a noble clerk that at that time was
there present; the French book saith, it was the Bishop of Rochester;
and the Pope gave him bulls under lead unto King Arthur of England,
charging him upon pain of interdicting of all England, that he take his
queen Dame Guenever unto him again, and accord with Sir Launcelot.



CHAPTER XIV. How the Pope sent down his bulls to make peace, and how Sir
Launcelot brought the queen to King Arthur.


SO when this Bishop was come to Carlisle he shewed the king these bulls.
And when the king understood these bulls he nist what to do: full fain
he would have been accorded with Sir Launcelot, but Sir Gawaine would
not suffer him; but as for to have the queen, thereto he agreed. But
in nowise Sir Gawaine would not suffer the king to accord with Sir
Launcelot; but as for the queen he consented. And then the Bishop had
of the king his great seal, and his assurance as he was a true anointed
king that Sir Launcelot should come safe, and go safe, and that the
queen should not be spoken unto of the king, nor of none other, for no
thing done afore time past; and of all these appointments the Bishop
brought with him sure assurance and writing, to shew Sir Launcelot.

So when the Bishop was come to Joyous Gard, there he shewed Sir
Launcelot how the Pope had written to Arthur and unto him, and there he
told him the perils if he withheld the queen from the king. It was
never in my thought, said Launcelot, to withhold the queen from my lord
Arthur; but, insomuch she should have been dead for my sake, meseemeth
it was my part to save her life, and put her from that danger, till
better recover might come. And now I thank God, said Sir Launcelot, that
the Pope hath made her peace; for God knoweth, said Sir Launcelot, I
will be a thousandfold more gladder to bring her again, than ever I was
of her taking away; with this, I may be sure to come safe and go safe,
and that the queen shall have her liberty as she had before; and never
for no thing that hath been surmised afore this time, she never from
this day stand in no peril. For else, said Sir Launcelot, I dare
adventure me to keep her from an harder shour than ever I kept her. It
shall not need you, said the Bishop, to dread so much; for wit you well,
the Pope must be obeyed, and it were not the Pope's worship nor my poor
honesty to wit you distressed, neither the queen, neither in peril, nor
shamed. And then he shewed Sir Launcelot all his writing, both from the
Pope and from King Arthur. This is sure enough, said Sir Launcelot, for
full well I dare trust my lord's own writing and his seal, for he was
never shamed of his promise. Therefore, said Sir Launcelot unto the
Bishop, ye shall ride unto the king afore, and recommend me unto his
good grace, and let him have knowledging that this same day eight days,
by the grace of God, I myself shall bring my lady, Queen Guenever,
unto him. And then say ye unto my most redoubted king, that I will say
largely for the queen, that I shall none except for dread nor fear,
but the king himself, and my lord Sir Gawaine; and that is more for the
king's love than for himself.

So the Bishop departed and came to the king at Carlisle, and told him
all how Sir Launcelot answered him; and then the tears brast out of the
king's eyen. Then Sir Launcelot purveyed him an hundred knights, and all
were clothed in green velvet, and their horses trapped to their heels;
and every knight held a branch of olive in his hand, in tokening of
peace. And the queen had four-and-twenty gentlewomen following her in
the same wise; and Sir Launcelot had twelve coursers following him, and
on every courser sat a young gentleman, and all they were arrayed in
green velvet, with sarps of gold about their quarters, and the horse
trapped in the same wise down to the heels, with many ouches, y-set with
stones and pearls in gold, to the number of a thousand. And she and Sir
Launcelot were clothed in white cloth of gold tissue; and right so as
ye have heard, as the French book maketh mention, he rode with the
queen from Joyous Gard to Carlisle. And so Sir Launcelot rode throughout
Carlisle, and so in the castle, that all men might behold; and wit
you well there was many a weeping eye. And then Sir Launcelot himself
alighted and avoided his horse, and took the queen, and so led her where
King Arthur was in his seat: and Sir Gawaine sat afore him, and many
other great lords. So when Sir Launcelot saw the king and Sir Gawaine,
then he led the queen by the arm, and then he kneeled down, and the
queen both. Wit you well then was there many bold knight there with King
Arthur that wept as tenderly as though they had seen all their kin afore
them. So the king sat still, and said no word. And when Sir Launcelot
saw his countenance, he arose and pulled up the queen with him, and thus
he spake full knightly.



CHAPTER XV. Of the deliverance of the queen to the king by Sir
Launcelot, and what language Sir Gawaine had to Sir Launcelot.


MY most redoubted king, ye shall understand, by the Pope's commandment
and yours, I have brought to you my lady the queen, as right requireth;
and if there be any knight, of whatsomever degree that he be, except
your person, that will say or dare say but that she is true and clean
to you, I here myself, Sir Launcelot du Lake, will make it good upon his
body, that she is a true lady unto you; but liars ye have listened, and
that hath caused debate betwixt you and me. For time hath been, my lord
Arthur, that ye have been greatly pleased with me when I did battle for
my lady, your queen; and full well ye know, my most noble king, that she
hath been put to great wrong or this time; and sithen it pleased you at
many times that I should fight for her, meseemeth, my good lord, I had
more cause to rescue her from the fire, insomuch she should have been
brent for my sake. For they that told you those tales were liars, and so
it fell upon them; for by likelihood had not the might of God been with
me, I might never have endured fourteen knights, and they armed and
afore purposed, and I unarmed and not purposed. For I was sent for unto
my lady your queen, I wot not for what cause; but I was not so soon
within the chamber door, but anon Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred called
me traitor and recreant knight. They called thee right, said Sir
Gawaine. My lord Sir Gawaine, said Sir Launcelot, in their quarrel they
proved themselves not in the right. Well well, Sir Launcelot, said the
king, I have given thee no cause to do to me as thou hast done, for I
have worshipped thee and thine more than any of all my knights.

My good lord, said Sir Launcelot, so ye be not displeased, ye shall
understand I and mine have done you oft better service than any other
knights have done, in many divers places; and where ye have been full
hard bestead divers times, I have myself rescued you from many dangers;
and ever unto my power I was glad to please you, and my lord Sir
Gawaine; both in jousts, and tournaments, and in battles set, both
on horseback and on foot, I have often rescued you, and my lord Sir
Gawaine, and many mo of your knights in many divers places. For now I
will make avaunt, said Sir Launcelot, I will that ye all wit that yet
I found never no manner of knight but that I was overhard for him, an I
had done my utterance, thanked be God; howbeit I have been matched with
good knights, as Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak, but ever I had a favour
unto them and a deeming what they were. And I take God to record, said
Sir Launcelot, I never was wroth nor greatly heavy with no good knight
an I saw him busy about to win worship; and glad I was ever when I found
any knight that might endure me on horseback and on foot: howbeit Sir
Carados of the Dolorous Tower was a full noble knight and a passing
strong man, and that wot ye, my lord Sir Gawaine; for he might well
be called a noble knight when he by fine force pulled you out of your
saddle, and bound you overthwart afore him to his saddle bow; and there,
my lord Sir Gawaine, I rescued you, and slew him afore your sight. Also
I found his brother, Sir Turquin, in likewise leading Sir Gaheris, your
brother, bounden afore him; and there I rescued your brother and slew
that Turquin, and delivered three-score-and-four of my lord Arthur's
knights out of his prison. And now I dare say, said Sir Launcelot, I met
never with so strong knights, nor so well fighting, as was Sir Carados
and Sir Turquin, for I fought with them to the uttermost. And therefore,
said Sir Launcelot unto Sir Gawaine, meseemeth ye ought of right to
remember this; for, an I might have your good will, I would trust to God
to have my lord Arthur's good grace.



CHAPTER XVI. Of the communication between Sir Gawaine and Sir Launcelot,
with much other language.


THE king may do as he will, said Sir Gawaine, but wit thou well, Sir
Launcelot, thou and I shall never be accorded while we live, for thou
hast slain three of my brethren; and two of them ye slew traitorly and
piteously, for they bare none harness against thee, nor none would bear.
God would they had been armed, said Sir Launcelot, for then had they
been alive. And wit ye well Sir Gawaine, as for Sir Gareth, I love none
of my kinsmen so much as I did him; and ever while I live, said Sir
Launcelot, I will bewail Sir Gareth's death, not all only for the great
fear I have of you, but many causes cause me to be sorrowful. One is,
for I made him knight; another is, I wot well he loved me above all
other knights; and the third is, he was passing noble, true, courteous,
and gentle, and well conditioned; the fourth is, I wist well, anon as I
heard that Sir Gareth was dead, I should never after have your love, but
everlasting war betwixt us; and also I wist well that ye would cause my
noble lord Arthur for ever to be my mortal foe. And as Jesu be my help,
said Sir Launcelot, I slew never Sir Gareth nor Sir Gaheris by my will;
but alas that ever they were unarmed that unhappy day. But thus much
I shall offer me, said Sir Launcelot, if it may please the king's good
grace, and you, my lord Sir Gawaine, I shall first begin at Sandwich,
and there I shall go in my shirt, barefoot; and at every ten miles' end
I will found and gar make an house of religion, of what order that ye
will assign me, with an whole convent, to sing and read, day and night,
in especial for Sir Gareth's sake and Sir Gaheris. And this shall
I perform from Sandwich unto Carlisle; and every house shall have
sufficient livelihood. And this shall I perform while I have any
livelihood in Christendom; and there nis none of all these religious
places, but they shall be performed, furnished and garnished in all
things as an holy place ought to be, I promise you faithfully. And this,
Sir Gawaine, methinketh were more fairer, holier, and more better to
their souls, than ye, my most noble king, and you, Sir Gawaine, to war
upon me, for thereby shall ye get none avail.

Then all knights and ladies that were there wept as they were mad, and
the tears fell on King Arthur's cheeks. Sir Launcelot, said Sir Gawaine,
I have right well heard thy speech, and thy great proffers, but wit
thou well, let the king do as it pleased him, I will never forgive my
brothers' death, and in especial the death of my brother, Sir Gareth.
And if mine uncle, King Arthur, will accord with thee, he shall lose my
service, for wit thou well thou art both false to the king and to me.
Sir, said Launcelot he beareth not the life that may make that good and
if ye, Sir Gawaine, will charge me with so high a thing, ye must pardon
me, for then needs must I answer you. Nay, said Sir Gawaine, we are past
that at this time, and that caused the Pope, for he hath charged mine
uncle, the king, that he shall take his queen again, and to accord with
thee, Sir Launcelot, as for this season, and therefore thou shalt go
safe as thou camest. But in this land thou shalt not abide past fifteen
days, such summons I give thee: so the king and we were consented and
accorded or thou camest. And else, said Sir Gawaine, wit thou well thou
shouldst not have come here, but if it were maugre thy head. And if
it were not for the Pope's commandment, said Sir Gawaine, I should do
battle with mine own body against thy body, and prove it upon thee, that
thou hast been both false unto mine uncle King Arthur, and to me both;
and that shall I prove upon thy body, when thou art departed from hence,
wheresomever I find thee.



CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Launcelot departed from the king and from Joyous
Gard over seaward, and what knights went with him.


THEN Sir Launcelot sighed, and therewith the tears fell on his cheeks,
and then he said thus: Alas, most noble Christian realm, whom I have
loved above all other realms, and in thee I have gotten a great part of
my worship, and now I shall depart in this wise. Truly me repenteth
that ever I came in this realm, that should be thus shamefully banished,
undeserved and causeless; but fortune is so variant, and the wheel so
moveable, there nis none constant abiding, and that may be proved by
many old chronicles, of noble Ector, and Troilus, and Alisander, the
mighty conqueror, and many mo other; when they were most in their
royalty, they alighted lowest. And so fareth it by me, said Sir
Launcelot, for in this realm I had worship, and by me and mine all the
whole Round Table hath been increased more in worship, by me and mine
blood, than by any other. And therefore wit thou well, Sir Gawaine, I
may live upon my lands as well as any knight that here is. And if ye,
most redoubted king, will come upon my lands with Sir Gawaine to war
upon me, I must endure you as well as I may. But as to you, Sir Gawaine,
if that ye come there, I pray you charge me not with treason nor felony,
for an ye do, I must answer you. Do thou thy best, said Sir Gawaine;
therefore hie thee fast that thou were gone, and wit thou well we shall
soon come after, and break the strongest castle that thou hast, upon thy
head. That shall not need, said Sir Launcelot, for an I were as orgulous
set as ye are, wit you well I should meet you in midst of the field.
Make thou no more language, said Sir Gawaine, but deliver the queen from
thee, and pike thee lightly out of this court. Well, said Sir Launcelot,
an I had wist of this short coming, I would have advised me twice or
that I had come hither; for an the queen had been so dear to me as ye
noise her, I durst have kept her from the fellowship of the best knights
under heaven.

And then Sir Launcelot said unto Guenever, in hearing of the king and
them all: Madam, now I must depart from you and this noble fellowship
for ever; and sithen it is so, I beseech you to pray for me, and say me
well; and if ye be hard bestead by any false tongues, lightly my lady
send me word, and if any knight's hands may deliver you by battle, I
shall deliver you. And therewithal Sir Launcelot kissed the queen; and
then he said all openly. Now let see what he be in this place that dare
say the queen is not true unto my lord Arthur, let see who will speak an
he dare speak. And therewith he brought the queen to the king, and then
Sir Launcelot took his leave and departed; and there was neither king,
duke, nor earl, baron nor knight, lady nor gentlewoman, but all they
wept as people out of their mind, except Sir Gawaine. And when the noble
Sir Launcelot took his horse to ride out of Carlisle, there was sobbing
and weeping for pure dole of his departing; and so he took his way unto
Joyous Gard. And then ever after he called it the Dolorous Gard. And
thus departed Sir Launcelot from the court for ever.

And so when he came to Joyous Gard he called his fellowship unto him,
and asked them what they would do Then they answered all wholly together
with one voice they would as he would do. My fair fellows, said Sir
Launcelot, I must depart out of this most noble realm, and now I shall
depart it grieveth me sore, for I shall depart with no worship, for a
flemed man departed never out of a realm with no worship; and that is my
heaviness, for ever I fear after my days that men shall chronicle upon
me that I was flemed out of this land; and else, my fair lords, be ye
sure, an I had not dread shame, my lady, Queen Guenever, and I should
never have departed.

Then spake many noble knights, as Sir Palomides, Sir Safere his brother,
and Sir Bellingere le Beuse, and Sir Urre, with Sir Lavaine, with many
others: Sir, an ye be so disposed to abide in this land we will never
fail you; and if ye list not to abide in this land there nis none of the
good knights that here be will fail you, for many causes. One is, all
we that be not of your blood shall never be welcome to the court.
And sithen it liked us to take a part with you in your distress and
heaviness in this realm, wit you well it shall like us as well to go in
other countries with you, and there to take such part as ye do. My fair
lords, said Sir Launcelot, I well understand you, and as I can, thank
you: and ye shall understand, such livelihood as I am born unto I shall
depart with you in this manner of wise; that is for to say, I shall
depart all my livelihood and all my lands freely among you, and I myself
will have as little as any of you, for have I sufficient that may long
to my person, I will ask none other rich array; and I trust to God to
maintain you on my lands as well as ever were maintained any knights.
Then spake all the knights at once: He have shame that will leave you;
for we all understand in this realm will be now no quiet, but ever
strife and debate, now the fellowship of the Round Table is broken; for
by the noble fellowship of the Round Table was King Arthur upborne, and
by their noblesse the king and all his realm was in quiet and rest, and
a great part they said all was because of your noblesse.



CHAPTER XVIII. How Sir Launcelot passed over the sea, and how he made
great lords of the knights that went with him.


TRULY, said Sir Launcelot, I thank you all of your good saying, howbeit,
I wot well, in me was not all the stability of this realm, but in that
I might I did my devoir; and well I am sure I knew many rebellions in
my days that by me were peaced, and I trow we all shall hear of them in
short space, and that me sore repenteth. For ever I dread me, said Sir
Launcelot, that Sir Mordred will make trouble, for he is passing envious
and applieth him to trouble. So they were accorded to go with Sir
Launcelot to his lands; and to make short tale, they trussed, and paid
all that would ask them; and wholly an hundred knights departed with Sir
Launcelot at once, and made their avows they would never leave him for
weal nor for woe.

And so they shipped at Cardiff, and sailed unto Benwick: some men call
it Bayonne, and some men call it Beaune, where the wine of Beaune is.
But to say the sooth, Sir Launcelot and his nephews were lords of all
France, and of all the lands that longed unto France; he and his kindred
rejoiced it all through Sir Launcelot's noble prowess. And then Sir
Launcelot stuffed and furnished and garnished all his noble towns and
castles. Then all the people of those lands came to Sir Launcelot on
foot and hands. And so when he had stablished all these countries, he
shortly called a parliament; and there he crowned Sir Lionel, King of
France; and Sir Bors [he] crowned him king of all King Claudas' lands;
and Sir Ector de Maris, that was Sir Launcelot's youngest brother,
he crowned him King of Benwick, and king of all Guienne, that was Sir
Launcelot's own land. And he made Sir Ector prince of them all, and thus
he departed.

Then Sir Launcelot advanced all his noble knights, and first he advanced
them of his blood; that was Sir Blamore, he made him Duke of Limosin
in Guienne and Sir Bleoberis he made him Duke of Poictiers, and Sir
Gahalantine he made him Duke of Querne, and Sir Galihodin he made him
Duke of Sentonge, and Sir Galihud he made him Earl of Perigot, and Sir
Menadeuke he made him Earl of Roerge, and Sir Villiars the Valiant he
made him Earl of Bearn, and Sir Hebes le Renoumes he made him Earl of
Comange, and Sir Lavaine he made him Earl of Arminak, and Sir Urre he
made him Earl of Estrake, and Sir Neroneus he made him Earl of Pardiak,
and Sir Plenorius he made Earl of Foise, and Sir Selises of the Dolorous
Tower he made him Earl of Masauke, and Sir Melias de Lile he made him
Earl of Tursauk, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse he made Earl of the Launds,
and Sir Palomides he made him Duke of the Provence, and Sir Safere
he made him Duke of Landok, and Sir Clegis he gave him the Earldom of
Agente, and Sir Sadok he gave the Earldom of Surlat, and Sir Dinas le
Seneschal he made him Duke of Anjou, and Sir Clarrus he made him Duke of
Normandy. Thus Sir Launcelot rewarded his noble knights and many more,
that meseemeth it were too long to rehearse.



CHAPTER XIX. How King Arthur and Sir Gawaine made a great host ready to
go over sea to make war on Sir Launcelot.


SO leave we Sir Launcelot in his lands, and his noble knights with him,
and return we again unto King Arthur and to Sir Gawaine, that made a
great host ready, to the number of threescore thousand; and all thing
was made ready for their shipping to pass over the sea, and so they
shipped at Cardiff. And there King Arthur made Sir Mordred chief ruler
of all England, and also he put Queen Guenever under his governance;
because Sir Mordred was King Arthur's son, he gave him the rule of his
land and of his wife; and so the king passed the sea and landed upon Sir
Launcelot's lands, and there he brent and wasted, through the vengeance
of Sir Gawaine, all that they might overrun.

When this word came to Sir Launcelot, that King Arthur and Sir Gawaine
were landed upon his lands, and made a full great destruction and waste,
then spake Sir Bors, and said: My lord Sir Launcelot, it is shame that
we suffer them thus to ride over our lands, for wit you well, suffer ye
them as long as ye will, they will do you no favour an they may handle
you. Then said Sir Lionel that was wary and wise: My lord Sir Launcelot,
I will give this counsel, let us keep our strong walled towns until they
have hunger and cold, and blow on their nails; and then let us freshly
set upon them, and shred them down as sheep in a field, that aliens may
take example for ever how they land upon our lands.

Then spake King Bagdemagus to Sir Launcelot: Sir, your courtesy will
shende us all, and thy courtesy hath waked all this sorrow; for an they
thus over our lands ride, they shall by process bring us all to
nought whilst we thus in holes us hide. Then said Sir Galihud unto Sir
Launcelot: Sir, here be knights come of kings' blood, that will not long
droop, and they are within these walls; therefore give us leave, like as
we be knights, to meet them in the field, and we shall slay them, that
they shall curse the time that ever they came into this country. Then
spake seven brethren of North Wales, and they were seven noble knights;
a man might seek in seven kings' lands or he might find such seven
knights. Then they all said at once: Sir Launcelot, for Christ's sake
let us out ride with Sir Galihud, for we be never wont to cower in
castles nor in noble towns.

Then spake Sir Launcelot, that was master and governor of them all: My
fair lords, wit you well I am full loath to ride out with my knights for
shedding of Christian blood; and yet my lands I understand be full bare
for to sustain any host awhile, for the mighty wars that whilom made
King Claudas upon this country, upon my father King Ban, and on mine
uncle King Bors; howbeit we will as at this time keep our strong walls,
and I shall send a messenger unto my lord Arthur, a treaty for to take;
for better is peace than always war.

So Sir Launcelot sent forth a damosel and a dwarf with her, requiring
King Arthur to leave his warring upon his lands; and so she start upon
a palfrey, and the dwarf ran by her side. And when she came to the
pavilion of King Arthur, there she alighted; and there met her a gentle
knight, Sir Lucan the Butler, and said: Fair damosel, come ye from Sir
Launcelot du Lake? Yea sir, she said, therefore I come hither to speak
with my lord the king. Alas, said Sir Lucan, my lord Arthur would love
Launcelot, but Sir Gawaine will not suffer him. And then he said: I pray
to God, damosel, ye may speed well, for all we that be about the king
would Sir Launcelot did best of any knight living. And so with this
Lucan led the damosel unto the king where he sat with Sir Gawaine, for
to hear what she would say. So when she had told her tale, the water ran
out of the king's eyen, and all the lords were full glad for to advise
the king as to be accorded with Sir Launcelot, save all only Sir
Gawaine, and he said: My lord mine uncle, what will ye do? Will ye now
turn again, now ye are passed thus far upon this journey? all the
world will speak of your villainy. Nay, said Arthur, wit thou well, Sir
Gawaine, I will do as ye will advise me; and yet meseemeth, said Arthur,
his fair proffers were not good to be refused; but sithen I am come so
far upon this journey, I will that ye give the damosel her answer, for I
may not speak to her for pity, for her proffers be so large.



CHAPTER XX. What message Sir Gawaine sent to Sir Launcelot; and how King
Arthur laid siege to Benwick, and other matters.


THEN Sir Gawaine said to the damosel thus: Damosel, say ye to Sir
Launcelot that it is waste labour now to sue to mine uncle; for tell
him, an he would have made any labour for peace, he should have made
it or this time, for tell him now it is too late; and say that I, Sir
Gawaine, so send him word, that I promise him by the faith I owe unto
God and to knighthood, I shall never leave him till he have slain me
or I him. So the damosel wept and departed, and there were many weeping
eyen; and so Sir Lucan brought the damosel to her palfrey, and so she
came to Sir Launcelot where he was among all his knights. And when Sir
Launcelot had heard this answer, then the tears ran down by his cheeks.
And then his noble knights strode about him, and said: Sir Launcelot,
wherefore make ye such cheer, think what ye are, and what men we are,
and let us noble knights match them in midst of the field. That may be
lightly done, said Sir Launcelot, but I was never so loath to do battle,
and therefore I pray you, fair sirs, as ye love me, be ruled as I will
have you, for I will always flee that noble king that made me knight.
And when I may no further, I must needs defend me, and that will be more
worship for me and us all than to compare with that noble king whom we
have all served. Then they held their language, and as that night they
took their rest.

And upon the morn early, in the dawning of the day, as knights looked
out, they saw the city of Benwick besieged round about; and fast they
began to set up ladders, and then they defied them out of the town, and
beat them from the walls wightly. Then came forth Sir Gawaine well armed
upon a stiff steed, and he came before the chief gate, with his spear
in his hand, crying: Sir Launcelot, where art thou? is there none of you
proud knights dare break a spear with me? Then Sir Bors made him ready,
and came forth out of the town, and there Sir Gawaine encountered with
Sir Bors. And at that time he smote Sir Bors down from his horse, and
almost he had slain him; and so Sir Bors was rescued and borne into the
town. Then came forth Sir Lionel, brother to Sir Bors, and thought to
revenge him; and either feutred their spears, and ran together; and
there they met spitefully, but Sir Gawaine had such grace that he smote
Sir Lionel down, and wounded him there passing sore; and then Sir Lionel
was rescued and borne into the town. And this Sir Gawaine came every
day, and he failed not but that he smote down one knight or other.

So thus they endured half a year, and much slaughter was of people on
both parties. Then it befell upon a day, Sir Gawaine came afore the
gates armed at all pieces on a noble horse, with a great spear in his
hand; and then he cried with a loud voice: Where art thou now, thou
false traitor, Sir Launcelot? Why hidest thou thyself within holes and
walls like a coward? Look out now, thou false traitor knight, and here
I shall revenge upon thy body the death of my three brethren. All this
language heard Sir Launcelot every deal; and his kin and his knights
drew about him, and all they said at once to Sir Launcelot: Sir
Launcelot, now must ye defend you like a knight, or else ye be shamed
for ever; for, now ye be called upon treason, it is time for you to
stir, for ye have slept over-long and suffered over-much. So God me
help, said Sir Launcelot, I am right heavy of Sir Gawaine's words, for
now he charged me with a great charge; and therefore I wot it as well as
ye, that I must defend me, or else to be recreant.

Then Sir Launcelot bade saddle his strongest horse, and bade let
fetch his arms, and bring all unto the gate of the tower; and then Sir
Launcelot spake on high unto King Arthur, and said: My lord Arthur, and
noble king that made me knight, wit you well I am right heavy for your
sake, that ye thus sue upon me; and always I forbare you, for an I would
have been vengeable, I might have met you in midst of the field, and
there to have made your boldest knights full tame. And now I have
forborne half a year, and suffered you and Sir Gawaine to do what ye
would do; and now may I endure it no longer, for now must I needs defend
myself, insomuch Sir Gawaine hath appealed me of treason; the which is
greatly against my will that ever I should fight against any of your
blood, but now I may not forsake it, I am driven thereto as a beast till
a bay.

Then Sir Gawaine said: Sir Launcelot, an thou durst do battle, leave thy
babbling and come off, and let us ease our hearts. Then Sir Launcelot
armed him lightly, and mounted upon his horse, and either of the knights
gat great spears in their hands, and the host without stood still all
apart, and the noble knights came out of the city by a great number,
insomuch that when Arthur saw the number of men and knights, he
marvelled, and said to himself: Alas, that ever Sir Launcelot was
against me, for now I see he hath forborne me. And so the covenant was
made, there should no man nigh them, nor deal with them, till the one
were dead or yelden.



CHAPTER XXI. How Sir Launcelot and Sir Gawaine did battle together, and
how Sir Gawaine was overthrown and hurt.


THEN Sir Gawaine and Sir Launcelot departed a great way asunder, and
then they came together with all their horses' might as they might run,
and either smote other in midst of their shields; but the knights were
so strong, and their spears so big, that their horses might not endure
their buffets, and so their horses fell to the earth; and then they
avoided their horses, and dressed their shields afore them. Then they
stood together and gave many sad strokes on divers places of their
bodies, that the blood brast out on many sides and places. Then had Sir
Gawaine such a grace and gift that an holy man had given to him, that
every day in the year, from underne till high noon, his might increased
those three hours as much as thrice his strength, and that caused
Sir Gawaine to win great honour. And for his sake King Arthur made an
ordinance, that all manner of battles for any quarrels that should be
done afore King Arthur should begin at underne; and all was done for Sir
Gawaine's love, that by likelihood, if Sir Gawaine were on the one part,
he should have the better in battle while his strength endureth three
hours; but there were but few knights that time living that knew this
advantage that Sir Gawaine had, but King Arthur all only.

Thus Sir Launcelot fought with Sir Gawaine, and when Sir Launcelot felt
his might evermore increase, Sir Launcelot wondered and dread him sore
to be shamed. For as the French book saith, Sir Launcelot weened, when
he felt Sir Gawaine double his strength, that he had been a fiend and
none earthly man; wherefore Sir Launcelot traced and traversed, and
covered himself with his shield, and kept his might and his braide
during three hours; and that while Sir Gawaine gave him many sad brunts,
and many sad strokes, that all the knights that beheld Sir Launcelot
marvelled how that he might endure him; but full little understood they
that travail that Sir Launcelot had for to endure him. And then when
it was past noon Sir Gawaine had no more but his own might. When Sir
Launcelot felt him so come down, then he stretched him up and stood
near Sir Gawaine, and said thus: My lord Sir Gawaine, now I feel ye have
done; now my lord Sir Gawaine, I must do my part, for many great and
grievous strokes I have endured you this day with great pain.

Then Sir Launcelot doubled his strokes and gave Sir Gawaine such a
buffet on the helmet that he fell down on his side, and Sir Launcelot
withdrew him from him. Why withdrawest thou thee? said Sir Gawaine;
now turn again, false traitor knight, and slay me, for an thou leave me
thus, when I am whole I shall do battle with thee again. I shall endure
you, Sir, by God's grace, but wit thou well, Sir Gawaine, I will never
smite a felled knight. And so Sir Launcelot went into the city; and Sir
Gawaine was borne into King Arthur's pavilion, and leeches were brought
to him, and searched and salved with soft ointments. And then Sir
Launcelot said: Now have good day, my lord the king, for wit you well ye
win no worship at these walls; and if I would my knights outbring, there
should many a man die. Therefore, my lord Arthur, remember you of old
kindness; and however I fare, Jesu be your guide in all places.



CHAPTER XXII. Of the sorrow that King Arthur made for the war, and of
another battle where also Sir Gawaine had the worse.


ALAS, said the king, that ever this unhappy war was begun; for ever Sir
Launcelot forbeareth me in all places, and in likewise my kin, and that
is seen well this day by my nephew Sir Gawaine. Then King Arthur fell
sick for sorrow of Sir Gawaine, that he was so sore hurt, and because
of the war betwixt him and Sir Launcelot. So then they on King Arthur's
part kept the siege with little war withoutforth; and they withinforth
kept their walls, and defended them when need was. Thus Sir Gawaine lay
sick three weeks in his tents, with all manner of leech-craft that might
be had. And as soon as Sir Gawaine might go and ride, he armed him at
all points, and start upon a courser, and gat a spear in his hand, and
so he came riding afore the chief gate of Benwick; and there he cried
on height: Where art thou, Sir Launcelot? Come forth, thou false traitor
knight and recreant, for I am here, Sir Gawaine, will prove this that I
say on thee.

All this language Sir Launcelot heard, and then he said thus: Sir
Gawaine, me repents of your foul saying, that ye will not cease of your
language; for you wot well, Sir Gawaine, I know your might and all that
ye may do; and well ye wot, Sir Gawaine, ye may not greatly hurt me.
Come down, traitor knight, said he, and make it good the contrary with
thy hands, for it mishapped me the last battle to be hurt of thy hands;
therefore wit thou well I am come this day to make amends, for I ween
this day to lay thee as low as thou laidest me. Jesu defend me, said Sir
Launcelot, that ever I be so far in your danger as ye have been in mine,
for then my days were done. But Sir Gawaine, said Sir Launcelot, ye
shall not think that I tarry long, but sithen that ye so unknightly call
me of treason, ye shall have both your hands full of me. And then Sir
Launcelot armed him at all points, and mounted upon his horse, and gat
a great spear in his hand, and rode out at the gate. And both the hosts
were assembled, of them without and of them within, and stood in array
full manly. And both parties were charged to hold them still, to see and
behold the battle of these two noble knights. And then they laid their
spears in their rests, and they came together as thunder, and Sir
Gawaine brake his spear upon Sir Launcelot in a hundred pieces unto
his hand; and Sir Launcelot smote him with a greater might, that Sir
Gawaine's horse's feet raised, and so the horse and he fell to the
earth. Then Sir Gawaine deliverly avoided his horse, and put his shield
afore him, and eagerly drew his sword, and bade Sir Launcelot: Alight,
traitor knight, for if this mare's son hath failed me, wit thou well a
king's son and a queen's son shall not fail thee.

Then Sir Launcelot avoided his horse, and dressed his shield afore
him, and drew his sword; and so stood they together and gave many sad
strokes, that all men on both parties had thereof passing great
wonder. But when Sir Launcelot felt Sir Gawaine's might so marvellously
increase, he then withheld his courage and his wind, and kept himself
wonder covert of his might; and under his shield he traced and traversed
here and there, to break Sir Gawaine's strokes and his courage; and Sir
Gawaine enforced himself with all his might and power to destroy Sir
Launcelot; for as the French book saith, ever as Sir Gawaine's might
increased, right so increased his wind and his evil will. Thus Sir
Gawaine did great pain unto Sir Launcelot three hours, that he had right
great pain for to defend him.

And when the three hours were passed, that Sir Launcelot felt that Sir
Gawaine was come to his own proper strength, then Sir Launcelot said
unto Sir Gawaine: Now have I proved you twice, that ye are a full
dangerous knight, and a wonderful man of your might; and many wonderful
deeds have ye done in your days, for by your might increasing you have
deceived many a full noble and valiant knight; and, now I feel that ye
have done your mighty deeds, now wit you well I must do my deeds.
And then Sir Launcelot stood near Sir Gawaine, and then Sir Launcelot
doubled his strokes; and Sir Gawaine defended him mightily, but
nevertheless Sir Launcelot smote such a stroke upon Sir Gawaine's helm,
and upon the old wound, that Sir Gawaine sinked down upon his one
side in a swoon. And anon as he did awake he waved and foined at Sir
Launcelot as he lay, and said: Traitor knight, wit thou well I am not
yet slain, come thou near me and perform this battle unto the uttermost.
I will no more do than I have done, said Sir Launcelot, for when I see
you on foot I will do battle upon you all the while I see you stand on
your feet; but for to smite a wounded man that may not stand, God defend
me from such a shame. And then he turned him and went his way toward the
city. And Sir Gawaine evermore calling him traitor knight, and said:
Wit thou well Sir Launcelot, when I am whole I shall do battle with thee
again, for I shall never leave thee till that one of us be slain. Thus
as this siege endured, and as Sir Gawaine lay sick near a month; and
when he was well recovered and ready within three days to do battle
again with Sir Launcelot, right so came tidings unto Arthur from England
that made King Arthur and all his host to remove.

_Here followeth the xxi. book._





BOOK XXI.



CHAPTER I. How Sir Mordred presumed and took on him to be King of
England, and would have married the queen, his father's wife.


AS Sir Mordred was ruler of all England, he did do make letters as
though that they came from beyond the sea, and the letters specified
that King Arthur was slain in battle with Sir Launcelot. Wherefore Sir
Mordred made a parliament, and called the lords together, and there he
made them to choose him king; and so was he crowned at Canterbury,
and held a feast there fifteen days; and afterward he drew him unto
Winchester, and there he took the Queen Guenever, and said plainly that
he would wed her which was his uncle's wife and his father's wife. And
so he made ready for the feast, and a day prefixed that they should be
wedded; wherefore Queen Guenever was passing heavy. But she durst not
discover her heart, but spake fair, and agreed to Sir Mordred's will.
Then she desired of Sir Mordred for to go to London, to buy all manner
of things that longed unto the wedding. And because of her fair speech
Sir Mordred trusted her well enough, and gave her leave to go. And so
when she came to London she took the Tower of London, and suddenly in
all haste possible she stuffed it with all manner of victual, and well
garnished it with men, and so kept it.

Then when Sir Mordred wist and understood how he was beguiled, he was
passing wroth out of measure. And a short tale for to make, he went
and laid a mighty siege about the Tower of London, and made many great
assaults thereat, and threw many great engines unto them, and shot great
guns. But all might not prevail Sir Mordred, for Queen Guenever would
never for fair speech nor for foul, would never trust to come in his
hands again.

Then came the Bishop of Canterbury, the which was a noble clerk and an
holy man, and thus he said to Sir Mordred: Sir, what will ye do? will
ye first displease God and sithen shame yourself, and all knighthood? Is
not King Arthur your uncle, no farther but your mother's brother, and on
her himself King Arthur begat you upon his own sister, therefore how
may you wed your father's wife? Sir, said the noble clerk, leave this
opinion or I shall curse you with book and bell and candle. Do thou thy
worst, said Sir Mordred, wit thou well I shall defy thee. Sir, said the
Bishop, and wit you well I shall not fear me to do that me ought to do.
Also where ye noise where my lord Arthur is slain, and that is not so,
and therefore ye will make a foul work in this land. Peace, thou false
priest, said Sir Mordred, for an thou chafe me any more I shall make
strike off thy head. So the Bishop departed and did the cursing in the
most orgulist wise that might be done. And then Sir Mordred sought the
Bishop of Canterbury, for to have slain him. Then the Bishop fled, and
took part of his goods with him, and went nigh unto Glastonbury; and
there he was as priest hermit in a chapel, and lived in poverty and in
holy prayers, for well he understood that mischievous war was at hand.

Then Sir Mordred sought on Queen Guenever by letters and sonds, and by
fair means and foul means, for to have her to come out of the Tower of
London; but all this availed not, for she answered him shortly, openly
and privily, that she had liefer slay herself than to be married with
him. Then came word to Sir Mordred that King Arthur had araised the
siege for Sir Launcelot, and he was coming homeward with a great host,
to be avenged upon Sir Mordred; wherefore Sir Mordred made write writs
to all the barony of this land, and much people drew to him. For then
was the common voice among them that with Arthur was none other life but
war and strife, and with Sir Mordred was great joy and bliss. Thus was
Sir Arthur depraved, and evil said of. And many there were that King
Arthur had made up of nought, and given them lands, might not then say
him a good word. Lo ye all Englishmen, see ye not what a mischief here
was! for he that was the most king and knight of the world, and
most loved the fellowship of noble knights, and by him they were all
upholden, now might not these Englishmen hold them content with him. Lo
thus was the old custom and usage of this land; and also men say that
we of this land have not yet lost nor forgotten that custom and usage.
Alas, this is a great default of us Englishmen, for there may no thing
please us no term. And so fared the people at that time, they were
better pleased with Sir Mordred than they were with King Arthur; and
much people drew unto Sir Mordred, and said they would abide with him
for better and for worse. And so Sir Mordred drew with a great host to
Dover, for there he heard say that Sir Arthur would arrive, and so he
thought to beat his own father from his lands; and the most part of all
England held with Sir Mordred, the people were so new-fangle.



CHAPTER II. How after that King Arthur had tidings, he returned and came
to Dover, where Sir Mordred met him to let his landing; and of the death
of Sir Gawaine.


AND so as Sir Mordred was at Dover with his host, there came King Arthur
with a great navy of ships, and galleys, and carracks. And there was Sir
Mordred ready awaiting upon his landing, to let his own father to land
upon the land that he was king over. Then there was launching of great
boats and small, and full of noble men of arms; and there was much
slaughter of gentle knights, and many a full bold baron was laid full
low, on both parties. But King Arthur was so courageous that there might
no manner of knights let him to land, and his knights fiercely followed
him; and so they landed maugre Sir Mordred and all his power, and put
Sir Mordred aback, that he fled and all his people.

So when this battle was done, King Arthur let bury his people that were
dead. And then was noble Sir Gawaine found in a great boat, lying more
than half dead When Sir Arthur wist that Sir Gawaine was laid so low; he
went unto him; and there the king made sorrow out of measure, and took
Sir Gawaine in his arms, and thrice he there swooned. And then when
he awaked, he said: Alas, Sir Gawaine, my sister's son, here now thou
liest; the man in the world that I loved most; and now is my joy gone,
for now, my nephew Sir Gawaine, I will discover me unto your person: in
Sir Launcelot and you I most had my joy, and mine affiance, and now have
I lost my joy of you both; wherefore all mine earthly joy is gone from
me. Mine uncle King Arthur, said Sir Gawaine, wit you well my death-day
is come, and all is through mine own hastiness and wilfulness; for I am
smitten upon the old wound the which Sir Launcelot gave me, on the which
I feel well I must die; and had Sir Launcelot been with you as he was,
this unhappy war had never begun; and of all this am I causer, for Sir
Launcelot and his blood, through their prowess, held all your cankered
enemies in subjection and daunger. And now, said Sir Gawaine, ye
shall miss Sir Launcelot. But alas, I would not accord with him, and
therefore, said Sir Gawaine, I pray you, fair uncle, that I may have
paper, pen, and ink, that I may write to Sir Launcelot a cedle with mine
own hands.

And then when paper and ink was brought, then Gawaine was set up weakly
by King Arthur, for he was shriven a little to-fore; and then he wrote
thus, as the French book maketh mention: Unto Sir Launcelot, flower
of all noble knights that ever I heard of or saw by my days, I, Sir
Gawaine, King Lot's son of Orkney, sister's son unto the noble King
Arthur, send thee greeting, and let thee have knowledge that the tenth
day of May I was smitten upon the old wound that thou gavest me afore
the city of Benwick, and through the same wound that thou gavest me I
am come to my death-day. And I will that all the world wit, that I, Sir
Gawaine, knight of the Table Round, sought my death, and not through thy
deserving, but it was mine own seeking; wherefore I beseech thee, Sir
Launcelot, to return again unto this realm, and see my tomb, and pray
some prayer more or less for my soul. And this same day that I wrote
this cedle, I was hurt to the death in the same wound, the which I had
of thy hand, Sir Launcelot; for of a more nobler man might I not be
slain. Also Sir Launcelot, for all the love that ever was betwixt us,
make no tarrying, but come over the sea in all haste, that thou mayst
with thy noble knights rescue that noble king that made thee knight,
that is my lord Arthur; for he is full straitly bestead with a false
traitor, that is my half-brother, Sir Mordred; and he hath let crown him
king, and would have wedded my lady Queen Guenever, and so had he done
had she not put herself in the Tower of London. And so the tenth day of
May last past, my lord Arthur and we all landed upon them at Dover; and
there we put that false traitor, Sir Mordred, to flight, and there it
misfortuned me to be stricken upon thy stroke. And at the date of this
letter was written, but two hours and a half afore my death, written
with mine own hand, and so subscribed with part of my heart's blood. And
I require thee, most famous knight of the world, that thou wilt see my
tomb. And then Sir Gawaine wept, and King Arthur wept; and then they
swooned both. And when they awaked both, the king made Sir Gawaine to
receive his Saviour. And then Sir Gawaine prayed the king for to send
for Sir Launcelot, and to cherish him above all other knights.

And so at the hour of noon Sir Gawaine yielded up the spirit; and then
the king let inter him in a chapel within Dover Castle; and there yet
all men may see the skull of him, and the same wound is seen that Sir
Launcelot gave him in battle. Then was it told the king that Sir Mordred
had pight a new field upon Barham Down. And upon the morn the king rode
thither to him, and there was a great battle betwixt them, and much
people was slain on both parties; but at the last Sir Arthur's party
stood best, and Sir Mordred and his party fled unto Canterbury.



CHAPTER III. How after, Sir Gawaine's ghost appeared to King Arthur, and
warned him that he should not fight that day.


AND then the king let search all the towns for his knights that were
slain, and interred them; and salved them with soft salves that so sore
were wounded. Then much people drew unto King Arthur. And then they
said that Sir Mordred warred upon King Arthur with wrong. And then
King Arthur drew him with his host down by the seaside, westward toward
Salisbury; and there was a day assigned betwixt King Arthur and Sir
Mordred, that they should meet upon a down beside Salisbury, and not far
from the seaside; and this day was assigned on a Monday after Trinity
Sunday, whereof King Arthur was passing glad, that he might be avenged
upon Sir Mordred. Then Sir Mordred araised much people about London,
for they of Kent, Southsex, and Surrey, Estsex, and of Southfolk, and
of Northfolk, held the most part with Sir Mordred; and many a full noble
knight drew unto Sir Mordred and to the king: but they that loved Sir
Launcelot drew unto Sir Mordred.

So upon Trinity Sunday at night, King Arthur dreamed a wonderful dream,
and that was this: that him seemed he sat upon a chaflet in a chair,
and the chair was fast to a wheel, and thereupon sat King Arthur in the
richest cloth of gold that might be made; and the king thought there was
under him, far from him, an hideous deep black water, and therein were
all manner of serpents, and worms, and wild beasts, foul and horrible;
and suddenly the king thought the wheel turned up-so-down, and he fell
among the serpents, and every beast took him by a limb; and then the
king cried as he lay in his bed and slept: Help. And then knights,
squires, and yeomen, awaked the king; and then he was so amazed that he
wist not where he was; and then he fell a-slumbering again, not sleeping
nor thoroughly waking. So the king seemed verily that there came Sir
Gawaine unto him with a number of fair ladies with him. And when King
Arthur saw him, then he said: Welcome, my sister's son; I weened thou
hadst been dead, and now I see thee alive, much am I beholding unto
Almighty Jesu. O fair nephew and my sister's son, what be these ladies
that hither be come with you? Sir, said Sir Gawaine, all these be ladies
for whom I have foughten when I was man living, and all these are those
that I did battle for in righteous quarrel; and God hath given them that
grace at their great prayer, because I did battle for them, that they
should bring me hither unto you: thus much hath God given me leave, for
to warn you of your death; for an ye fight as to-morn with Sir Mordred,
as ye both have assigned, doubt ye not ye must be slain, and the
most part of your people on both parties. And for the great grace and
goodness that almighty Jesu hath unto you, and for pity of you, and many
more other good men there shall be slain, God hath sent me to you of
his special grace, to give you warning that in no wise ye do battle
as to-morn, but that ye take a treaty for a month day; and proffer you
largely, so as to-morn to be put in a delay. For within a month
shall come Sir Launcelot with all his noble knights, and rescue you
worshipfully, and slay Sir Mordred, and all that ever will hold with
him. Then Sir Gawaine and all the ladies vanished.

And anon the king called upon his knights, squires, and yeomen, and
charged them wightly to fetch his noble lords and wise bishops unto
him. And when they were come, the king told them his avision, what Sir
Gawaine had told him, and warned him that if he fought on the morn he
should be slain. Then the king commanded Sir Lucan the Butler, and his
brother Sir Bedivere, with two bishops with them, and charged them in
any wise, an they might, Take a treaty for a month day with Sir Mordred,
and spare not, proffer him lands and goods as much as ye think best. So
then they departed, and came to Sir Mordred, where he had a grim host of
an hundred thousand men. And there they entreated Sir Mordred long time;
and at the last Sir Mordred was agreed for to have Cornwall and Kent, by
Arthur's days: after, all England, after the days of King Arthur.



CHAPTER IV. How by misadventure of an adder the battle began, where
Mordred was slain, and Arthur hurt to the death.


THEN were they condescended that King Arthur and Sir Mordred should
meet betwixt both their hosts, and everych of them should bring fourteen
persons; and they came with this word unto Arthur. Then said he: I am
glad that this is done: and so he went into the field. And when Arthur
should depart, he warned all his host that an they see any sword drawn:
Look ye come on fiercely, and slay that traitor, Sir Mordred, for I in
no wise trust him. In like wise Sir Mordred warned his host that: An ye
see any sword drawn, look that ye come on fiercely, and so slay all
that ever before you standeth; for in no wise I will not trust for this
treaty, for I know well my father will be avenged on me. And so they
met as their appointment was, and so they were agreed and accorded
thoroughly; and wine was fetched, and they drank. Right soon came an
adder out of a little heath bush, and it stung a knight on the foot. And
when the knight felt him stung, he looked down and saw the adder, and
then he drew his sword to slay the adder, and thought of none other
harm. And when the host on both parties saw that sword drawn, then they
blew beams, trumpets, and horns, and shouted grimly. And so both hosts
dressed them together. And King Arthur took his horse, and said: Alas
this unhappy day! and so rode to his party. And Sir Mordred in like
wise. And never was there seen a more dolefuller battle in no Christian
land; for there was but rushing and riding, foining and striking, and
many a grim word was there spoken either to other, and many a deadly
stroke. But ever King Arthur rode throughout the battle of Sir Mordred
many times, and did full nobly as a noble king should, and at all times
he fainted never; and Sir Mordred that day put him in devoir, and in
great peril. And thus they fought all the long day, and never stinted
till the noble knights were laid to the cold earth; and ever they fought
still till it was near night, and by that time was there an hundred
thousand laid dead upon the down. Then was Arthur wood wroth out of
measure, when he saw his people so slain from him.

Then the king looked about him, and then was he ware, of all his host
and of all his good knights, were left no more alive but two knights;
that one was Sir Lucan the Butler, and his brother Sir Bedivere, and
they were full sore wounded. Jesu mercy, said the king, where are all my
noble knights become? Alas that ever I should see this doleful day, for
now, said Arthur, I am come to mine end. But would to God that I wist
where were that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all this mischief.
Then was King Arthur ware where Sir Mordred leaned upon his sword among
a great heap of dead men. Now give me my spear, said Arthur unto Sir
Lucan, for yonder I have espied the traitor that all this woe hath
wrought. Sir, let him be, said Sir Lucan, for he is unhappy; and if ye
pass this unhappy day ye shall be right well revenged upon him. Good
lord, remember ye of your night's dream, and what the spirit of
Sir Gawaine told you this night, yet God of his great goodness hath
preserved you hitherto. Therefore, for God's sake, my lord, leave off
by this, for blessed be God ye have won the field, for here we be three
alive, and with Sir Mordred is none alive; and if ye leave off now this
wicked day of destiny is past. Tide me death, betide me life, saith the
king, now I see him yonder alone he shall never escape mine hands, for
at a better avail shall I never have him. God speed you well, said Sir
Bedivere.

Then the king gat his spear in both his hands, and ran toward Sir
Mordred, crying: Traitor, now is thy death-day come. And when Sir
Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until him with his sword drawn in his
hand. And there King Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield, with a
foin of his spear, throughout the body, more than a fathom. And when
Sir Mordred felt that he had his death wound he thrust himself with the
might that he had up to the bur of King Arthur's spear. And right so he
smote his father Arthur, with his sword holden in both his hands, on the
side of the head, that the sword pierced the helmet and the brain-pan,
and therewithal Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth; and the noble
Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth, and there he swooned ofttimes. And
Sir Lucan the Butler and Sir Bedivere ofttimes heaved him up. And so
weakly they led him betwixt them both, to a little chapel not far from
the seaside. And when the king was there he thought him well eased.

Then heard they people cry in the field. Now go thou, Sir Lucan, said
the king, and do me to wit what betokens that noise in the field. So Sir
Lucan departed, for he was grievously wounded in many places. And so
as he yede, he saw and hearkened by the moonlight, how that pillers and
robbers were come into the field, to pill and to rob many a full noble
knight of brooches, and beads, of many a good ring, and of many a rich
jewel; and who that were not dead all out, there they slew them for
their harness and their riches. When Sir Lucan understood this work, he
came to the king as soon as he might, and told him all what he had heard
and seen. Therefore by my rede, said Sir Lucan, it is best that we bring
you to some town. I would it were so, said the king.



CHAPTER V. How King Arthur commanded to cast his sword Excalibur into
the water, and how he was delivered to ladies in a barge.


BUT I may not stand, mine head works so. Ah Sir Launcelot, said King
Arthur, this day have I sore missed thee: alas, that ever I was against
thee, for now have I my death, whereof Sir Gawaine me warned in my
dream. Then Sir Lucan took up the king the one part, and Sir Bedivere
the other part, and in the lifting the king swooned; and Sir Lucan fell
in a swoon with the lift, that the part of his guts fell out of his
body, and therewith the noble knight's heart brast. And when the king
awoke, he beheld Sir Lucan, how he lay foaming at the mouth, and part
of his guts lay at his feet. Alas, said the king, this is to me a full
heavy sight, to see this noble duke so die for my sake, for he would
have holpen me, that had more need of help than I. Alas, he would not
complain him, his heart was so set to help me: now Jesu have mercy upon
his soul! Then Sir Bedivere wept for the death of his brother. Leave
this mourning and weeping, said the king, for all this will not avail
me, for wit thou well an I might live myself, the death of Sir Lucan
would grieve me evermore; but my time hieth fast, said the king.
Therefore, said Arthur unto Sir Bedivere, take thou Excalibur, my good
sword, and go with it to yonder water side, and when thou comest there
I charge thee throw my sword in that water, and come again and tell me
what thou there seest. My lord, said Bedivere, your commandment shall be
done, and lightly bring you word again.

So Sir Bedivere departed, and by the way he beheld that noble sword,
that the pommel and the haft was all of precious stones; and then he
said to himself: If I throw this rich sword in the water, thereof shall
never come good, but harm and loss. And then Sir Bedivere hid Excalibur
under a tree. And so, as soon as he might, he came again unto the king,
and said he had been at the water, and had thrown the sword in the
water. What saw thou there? said the king. Sir, he said, I saw nothing
but waves and winds. That is untruly said of thee, said the king,
therefore go thou lightly again, and do my commandment; as thou art to
me lief and dear, spare not, but throw it in. Then Sir Bedivere returned
again, and took the sword in his hand; and then him thought sin and
shame to throw away that noble sword, and so eft he hid the sword, and
returned again, and told to the king that he had been at the water, and
done his commandment. What saw thou there? said the king. Sir, he said,
I saw nothing but the waters wap and waves wan. Ah, traitor untrue,
said King Arthur, now hast thou betrayed me twice. Who would have weened
that, thou that hast been to me so lief and dear? and thou art named a
noble knight, and would betray me for the richness of the sword. But now
go again lightly, for thy long tarrying putteth me in great jeopardy of
my life, for I have taken cold. And but if thou do now as I bid thee,
if ever I may see thee, I shall slay thee with mine own hands; for thou
wouldst for my rich sword see me dead.

Then Sir Bedivere departed, and went to the sword, and lightly took it
up, and went to the water side; and there he bound the girdle about the
hilts, and then he threw the sword as far into the water as he might;
and there came an arm and an hand above the water and met it, and caught
it, and so shook it thrice and brandished, and then vanished away the
hand with the sword in the water. So Sir Bedivere came again to the
king, and told him what he saw. Alas, said the king, help me hence, for
I dread me I have tarried over long. Then Sir Bedivere took the king
upon his back, and so went with him to that water side. And when they
were at the water side, even fast by the bank hoved a little barge with
many fair ladies in it, and among them all was a queen, and all they had
black hoods, and all they wept and shrieked when they saw King Arthur.
Now put me into the barge, said the king. And so he did softly; and
there received him three queens with great mourning; and so they set
them down, and in one of their laps King Arthur laid his head. And then
that queen said: Ah, dear brother, why have ye tarried so long from me?
alas, this wound on your head hath caught over-much cold. And so then
they rowed from the land, and Sir Bedivere beheld all those ladies go
from him. Then Sir Bedivere cried: Ah my lord Arthur, what shall become
of me, now ye go from me and leave me here alone among mine enemies?
Comfort thyself, said the king, and do as well as thou mayst, for in me
is no trust for to trust in; for I will into the vale of Avilion to heal
me of my grievous wound: and if thou hear never more of me, pray for my
soul. But ever the queens and ladies wept and shrieked, that it was pity
to hear. And as soon as Sir Bedivere had lost the sight of the barge, he
wept and wailed, and so took the forest; and so he went all that night,
and in the morning he was ware betwixt two holts hoar, of a chapel and
an hermitage.



CHAPTER VI. How Sir Bedivere found him on the morrow dead in an
hermitage, and how he abode there with the hermit.


THEN was Sir Bedivere glad, and thither he went; and when he came into
the chapel, he saw where lay an hermit grovelling on all four, there
fast by a tomb was new graven. When the hermit saw Sir Bedivere he knew
him well, for he was but little to-fore Bishop of Canterbury, that Sir
Mordred flemed. Sir, said Bedivere, what man is there interred that ye
pray so fast for? Fair son, said the hermit, I wot not verily, but by
deeming. But this night, at midnight, here came a number of ladies, and
brought hither a dead corpse, and prayed me to bury him; and here they
offered an hundred tapers, and they gave me an hundred besants. Alas,
said Sir Bedivere, that was my lord King Arthur, that here lieth buried
in this chapel. Then Sir Bedivere swooned; and when he awoke he prayed
the hermit he might abide with him still there, to live with fasting and
prayers. For from hence will I never go, said Sir Bedivere, by my will,
but all the days of my life here to pray for my lord Arthur. Ye are
welcome to me, said the hermit, for I know ye better than ye ween that
I do. Ye are the bold Bedivere, and the full noble duke, Sir Lucan the
Butler, was your brother. Then Sir Bedivere told the hermit all as ye
have heard to-fore. So there bode Sir Bedivere with the hermit that was
to-fore Bishop of Canterbury, and there Sir Bedivere put upon him poor
clothes, and served the hermit full lowly in fasting and in prayers.

Thus of Arthur I find never more written in books that be authorised,
nor more of the very certainty of his death heard I never read, but thus
was he led away in a ship wherein were three queens; that one was
King Arthur's sister, Queen Morgan le Fay; the other was the Queen of
Northgalis; the third was the Queen of the Waste Lands. Also there was
Nimue, the chief lady of the lake, that had wedded Pelleas the good
knight; and this lady had done much for King Arthur, for she would never
suffer Sir Pelleas to be in no place where he should be in danger of
his life; and so he lived to the uttermost of his days with her in great
rest. More of the death of King Arthur could I never find, but that
ladies brought him to his burials; and such one was buried there, that
the hermit bare witness that sometime was Bishop of Canterbury, but
yet the hermit knew not in certain that he was verily the body of King
Arthur: for this tale Sir Bedivere, knight of the Table Round, made it
to be written.



CHAPTER VII. Of the opinion of some men of the death of King Arthur; and
how Queen Guenever made her a nun in Almesbury.


YET some men say in many parts of England that King Arthur is not dead,
but had by the will of our Lord Jesu into another place; and men say
that he shall come again, and he shall win the holy cross. I will not
say it shall be so, but rather I will say: here in this world he changed
his life. But many men say that there is written upon his tomb this
verse: _Hic jacet Arthurus, Rex quondam, Rexque futurus._ Thus leave I
here Sir Bedivere with the hermit, that dwelled that time in a chapel
beside Glastonbury, and there was his hermitage. And so they lived
in their prayers, and fastings, and great abstinence. And when Queen
Guenever understood that King Arthur was slain, and all the noble
knights, Sir Mordred and all the remnant, then the queen stole away, and
five ladies with her, and so she went to Almesbury; and there she let
make herself a nun, and ware white clothes and black, and great penance
she took, as ever did sinful lady in this land, and never creature could
make her merry; but lived in fasting, prayers, and alms-deeds, that all
manner of people marvelled how virtuously she was changed. Now leave we
Queen Guenever in Almesbury, a nun in white clothes and black, and there
she was Abbess and ruler as reason would; and turn we from her, and
speak we of Sir Launcelot du Lake.



CHAPTER VIII. How when Sir Lancelot heard of the death of King Arthur,
and of Sir Gawaine, and other matters, he came into England.


AND when he heard in his country that Sir Mordred was crowned king in
England, and made war against King Arthur, his own father, and would let
him to land in his own land; also it was told Sir Launcelot how that
Sir Mordred had laid siege about the Tower of London, because the queen
would not wed him; then was Sir Launcelot wroth out of measure, and said
to his kinsmen: Alas, that double traitor Sir Mordred, now me repenteth
that ever he escaped my hands, for much shame hath he done unto my lord
Arthur; for all I feel by the doleful letter that my lord Sir Gawaine
sent me, on whose soul Jesu have mercy that my lord Arthur is full hard
bestead. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should live to hear that
most noble king that made me knight thus to be overset with his subject
in his own realm. And this doleful letter that my lord, Sir Gawaine,
hath sent me afore his death, praying me to see his tomb, wit you well
his doleful words shall never go from mine heart, for he was a full
noble knight as ever was born; and in an unhappy hour was I born that
ever I should have that unhap to slay first Sir Gawaine, Sir Gaheris
the good knight, and mine own friend Sir Gareth, that full noble knight.
Alas, I may say I am unhappy, said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should
do thus unhappily, and, alas, yet might I never have hap to slay that
traitor, Sir Mordred.

Leave your complaints, said Sir Bors, and first revenge you of the death
of Sir Gawaine; and it will be well done that ye see Sir Gawaine's tomb,
and secondly that ye revenge my lord Arthur, and my lady, Queen Guenever
I thank you, said Sir Launcelot, for ever ye will my worship.

Then they made them ready in all the haste that might be, with ships and
galleys, with Sir Launcelot and his host to pass into England. And so
he passed over the sea till he came to Dover, and there he landed with
seven kings, and the number was hideous to behold. Then Sir Launcelot
spered of men of Dover where was King Arthur become. Then the people
told him how that he was slain, and Sir Mordred and an hundred thousand
died on a day; and how Sir Mordred gave King Arthur there the first
battle at his landing, and there was good Sir Gawaine slain; and on the
morn Sir Mordred fought with the king upon Barham Down, and there the
king put Sir Mordred to the worse. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, this is
the heaviest tidings that ever came to me. Now, fair sirs, said Sir
Launcelot, shew me the tomb of Sir Gawaine. And then certain people of
the town brought him into the castle of Dover, and shewed him the tomb.
Then Sir Launcelot kneeled down and wept, and prayed heartily for his
soul. And that night he made a dole, and all they that would come had
as much flesh, fish, wine and ale, and every man and woman had twelve
pence, come who would. Thus with his own hand dealt he this money, in a
mourning gown; and ever he wept, and prayed them to pray for the soul
of Sir Gawaine. And on the morn all the priests and clerks that might
be gotten in the country were there, and sang mass of Requiem; and there
offered first Sir Launcelot, and he offered an hundred pound; and
then the seven kings offered forty pound apiece; and also there was a
thousand knights, and each of them offered a pound; and the offering
dured from morn till night, and Sir Launcelot lay two nights on his tomb
in prayers and weeping.

Then on the third day Sir Launcelot called the kings, dukes, earls,
barons, and knights, and said thus: My fair lords, I thank you all of
your coming into this country with me, but we came too late, and that
shall repent me while I live, but against death may no man rebel. But
sithen it is so, said Sir Launcelot, I will myself ride and seek my
lady, Queen Guenever, for as I hear say she hath had great pain and much
disease; and I heard say that she is fled into the west. Therefore ye
all shall abide me here, and but if I come again within fifteen days,
then take your ships and your fellowship, and depart into your country,
for I will do as I say to you.



CHAPTER IX. How Sir Launcelot departed to seek the Queen Guenever, and
how he found her at Almesbury.


THEN came Sir Bors de Ganis, and said: My lord Sir Launcelot, what think
ye for to do, now to ride in this realm? wit ye well ye shall find few
friends. Be as be may, said Sir Launcelot, keep you still here, for I
will forth on my journey, and no man nor child shall go with me. So it
was no boot to strive, but he departed and rode westerly, and there he
sought a seven or eight days; and at the last he came to a nunnery,
and then was Queen Guenever ware of Sir Launcelot as he walked in the
cloister. And when she saw him there she swooned thrice, that all the
ladies and gentlewomen had work enough to hold the queen up. So when
she might speak, she called ladies and gentlewomen to her, and said: Ye
marvel, fair ladies, why I make this fare. Truly, she said, it is for
the sight of yonder knight that yonder standeth; wherefore I pray you
all call him to me.

When Sir Launcelot was brought to her, then she said to all the ladies:
Through this man and me hath all this war been wrought, and the death of
the most noblest knights of the world; for through our love that we have
loved together is my most noble lord slain. Therefore, Sir Launcelot,
wit thou well I am set in such a plight to get my soul-heal; and yet
I trust through God's grace that after my death to have a sight of the
blessed face of Christ, and at domesday to sit on his right side, for as
sinful as ever I was are saints in heaven. Therefore, Sir Launcelot, I
require thee and beseech thee heartily, for all the love that ever was
betwixt us, that thou never see me more in the visage; and I command
thee, on God's behalf, that thou forsake my company, and to thy kingdom
thou turn again, and keep well thy realm from war and wrack; for as
well as I have loved thee, mine heart will not serve me to see thee,
for through thee and me is the flower of kings and knights destroyed;
therefore, Sir Launcelot, go to thy realm, and there take thee a wife,
and live with her with joy and bliss; and I pray thee heartily, pray for
me to our Lord that I may amend my misliving. Now, sweet madam, said Sir
Launcelot, would ye that I should now return again unto my country, and
there to wed a lady? Nay, madam, wit you well that shall I never do, for
I shall never be so false to you of that I have promised; but the same
destiny that ye have taken you to, I will take me unto, for to please
Jesu, and ever for you I cast me specially to pray. If thou wilt do so,
said the queen, hold thy promise, but I may never believe but that thou
wilt turn to the world again. Well, madam, said he, ye say as pleaseth
you, yet wist you me never false of my promise, and God defend but
I should forsake the world as ye have done. For in the quest of the
Sangreal I had forsaken the vanities of the world had not your lord
been. And if I had done so at that time, with my heart, will, and
thought, I had passed all the knights that were in the Sangreal except
Sir Galahad, my son. And therefore, lady, sithen ye have taken you to
perfection, I must needs take me to perfection, of right. For I take
record of God, in you I have had mine earthly joy; and if I had found
you now so disposed, I had cast me to have had you into mine own realm.



CHAPTER X. How Sir Launcelot came to the hermitage where the Archbishop
of Canterbury was, and how he took the habit on him.


BUT sithen I find you thus disposed, I ensure you faithfully, I will
ever take me to penance, and pray while my life lasteth, if I may find
any hermit, either gray or white, that will receive me. Wherefore,
madam, I pray you kiss me and never no more. Nay, said the queen, that
shall I never do, but abstain you from such works: and they departed.
But there was never so hard an hearted man but he would have wept to see
the dolour that they made; for there was lamentation as they had been
stung with spears; and many times they swooned, and the ladies bare the
queen to her chamber.

And Sir Launcelot awoke, and went and took his horse, and rode all that
day and all night in a forest, weeping. And at the last he was ware of
an hermitage and a chapel stood betwixt two cliffs; and then he heard a
little bell ring to mass, and thither he rode and alighted, and tied his
horse to the gate, and heard mass. And he that sang mass was the Bishop
of Canterbury. Both the Bishop and Sir Bedivere knew Sir Launcelot, and
they spake together after mass. But when Sir Bedivere had told his
tale all whole, Sir Launcelot's heart almost brast for sorrow, and Sir
Launcelot threw his arms abroad, and said: Alas, who may trust this
world. And then he kneeled down on his knee, and prayed the Bishop to
shrive him and assoil him. And then he besought the Bishop that he might
be his brother. Then the Bishop said: I will gladly; and there he put
an habit upon Sir Launcelot, and there he served God day and night with
prayers and fastings.

Thus the great host abode at Dover. And then Sir Lionel took fifteen
lords with him, and rode to London to seek Sir Launcelot; and there Sir
Lionel was slain and many of his lords. Then Sir Bors de Ganis made the
great host for to go home again; and Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir
Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, with more other of Sir Launcelot's kin, took on
them to ride all England overthwart and endlong, to seek Sir Launcelot.
So Sir Bors by fortune rode so long till he came to the same chapel
where Sir Launcelot was; and so Sir Bors heard a little bell knell, that
rang to mass; and there he alighted and heard mass. And when mass was
done, the Bishop Sir Launcelot, and Sir Bedivere, came to Sir Bors. And
when Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot in that manner clothing, then he prayed
the Bishop that he might be in the same suit. And so there was an habit
put upon him, and there he lived in prayers and fasting. And within
half a year, there was come Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Blamore, Sir
Bleoberis, Sir Villiars, Sir Clarras, and Sir Gahalantine. So all these
seven noble knights there abode still. And when they saw Sir Launcelot
had taken him to such perfection, they had no lust to depart, but took
such an habit as he had.

Thus they endured in great penance six year; and then Sir Launcelot took
the habit of priesthood of the Bishop, and a twelvemonth he sang mass.
And there was none of these other knights but they read in books, and
holp for to sing mass, and rang bells, and did bodily all manner of
service. And so their horses went where they would, for they took no
regard of no worldly riches. For when they saw Sir Launcelot endure such
penance, in prayers, and fastings, they took no force what pain they
endured, for to see the noblest knight of the world take such abstinence
that he waxed full lean. And thus upon a night, there came a vision to
Sir Launcelot, and charged him, in remission of his sins, to haste
him unto Almesbury: And by then thou come there, thou shalt find Queen
Guenever dead. And therefore take thy fellows with thee, and purvey them
of an horse bier, and fetch thou the corpse of her, and bury her by her
husband, the noble King Arthur. So this avision came to Sir Launcelot
thrice in one night.



CHAPTER XI. How Sir Launcelot went with his seven fellows to Almesbury,
and found there Queen Guenever dead, whom they brought to Glastonbury.


THEN Sir Launcelot rose up or day, and told the hermit. It were well
done, said the hermit, that ye made you ready, and that you disobey not
the avision. Then Sir Launcelot took his eight fellows with him, and on
foot they yede from Glastonbury to Almesbury, the which is little more
than thirty mile. And thither they came within two days, for they were
weak and feeble to go. And when Sir Launcelot was come to Almesbury
within the nunnery, Queen Guenever died but half an hour afore. And
the ladies told Sir Launcelot that Queen Guenever told them all or
she passed, that Sir Launcelot had been priest near a twelvemonth, And
hither he cometh as fast as he may to fetch my corpse; and beside my
lord, King Arthur, he shall bury me. Wherefore the queen said in hearing
of them all: I beseech Almighty God that I may never have power to see
Sir Launcelot with my worldly eyen; and thus, said all the ladies, was
ever her prayer these two days, till she was dead. Then Sir Launcelot
saw her visage, but he wept not greatly, but sighed. And so he did all
the observance of the service himself, both the dirige, and on the
morn he sang mass. And there was ordained an horse bier; and so with an
hundred torches ever brenning about the corpse of the queen, and ever
Sir Launcelot with his eight fellows went about the horse bier, singing
and reading many an holy orison, and frankincense upon the corpse
incensed. Thus Sir Launcelot and his eight fellows went on foot from
Almesbury unto Glastonbury.

And when they were come to the chapel and the hermitage, there she had
a dirige, with great devotion. And on the morn the hermit that sometime
was Bishop of Canterbury sang the mass of Requiem with great devotion.
And Sir Launcelot was the first that offered, and then also his eight
fellows. And then she was wrapped in cered cloth of Raines, from the top
to the toe, in thirtyfold, and after she was put in a web of lead,
and then in a coffin of marble. And when she was put in the earth Sir
Launcelot swooned, and lay long still, while the hermit came and awaked
him, and said: Ye be to blame, for ye displease God with such manner
of sorrow-making. Truly, said Sir Launcelot, I trust I do not displease
God, for He knoweth mine intent. For my sorrow was not, nor is not
for any rejoicing of sin, but my sorrow may never have end. For when I
remember of her beauty, and of her noblesse, that was both with her king
and with her, so when I saw his corpse and her corpse so lie together,
truly mine heart would not serve to sustain my careful body. Also when I
remember me how by my default, mine orgule and my pride, that they were
both laid full low, that were peerless that ever was living of Christian
people, wit you well, said Sir Launcelot, this remembered, of their
kindness and mine unkindness, sank so to mine heart, that I might not
sustain myself. So the French book maketh mention.



CHAPTER XII. How Sir Launcelot began to sicken, and after died, whose
body was borne to Joyous Gard for to be buried.


THEN Sir Launcelot never after ate but little meat, ne drank, till he
was dead. For then he sickened more and more, and dried, and dwined
away. For the Bishop nor none of his fellows might not make him to eat,
and little he drank, that he was waxen by a cubit shorter than he was,
that the people could not know him. For evermore, day and night, he
prayed, but sometime he slumbered a broken sleep; ever he was lying
grovelling on the tomb of King Arthur and Queen Guenever. And there was
no comfort that the Bishop, nor Sir Bors, nor none of his fellows, could
make him, it availed not. So within six weeks after, Sir Launcelot fell
sick, and lay in his bed; and then he sent for the Bishop that there was
hermit, and all his true fellows. Then Sir Launcelot said with dreary
steven: Sir Bishop, I pray you give to me all my rites that longeth to
a Christian man. It shall not need you, said the hermit and all his
fellows, it is but heaviness of your blood, ye shall be well mended by
the grace of God to-morn. My fair lords, said Sir Launcelot, wit you
well my careful body will into the earth, I have warning more than now
I will say; therefore give me my rites. So when he was houseled and
anealed, and had all that a Christian man ought to have, he prayed the
Bishop that his fellows might bear his body to Joyous Gard. Some men say
it was Alnwick, and some men say it was Bamborough. Howbeit, said Sir
Launcelot, me repenteth sore, but I made mine avow sometime, that in
Joyous Gard I would be buried. And because of breaking of mine avow, I
pray you all, lead me thither. Then there was weeping and wringing of
hands among his fellows.

So at a season of the night they all went to their beds, for they all
lay in one chamber. And so after midnight, against day, the Bishop
[that] then was hermit, as he lay in his bed asleep, he fell upon a
great laughter. And therewith all the fellowship awoke, and came to the
Bishop, and asked him what he ailed. Ah Jesu mercy, said the Bishop,
why did ye awake me? I was never in all my life so merry and so well
at ease. Wherefore? said Sir Bors. Truly said the Bishop, here was Sir
Launcelot with me with mo angels than ever I saw men in one day. And
I saw the angels heave up Sir Launcelot unto heaven, and the gates of
heaven opened against him. It is but dretching of swevens, said Sir
Bors, for I doubt not Sir Launcelot aileth nothing but good. It may
well be, said the Bishop; go ye to his bed, and then shall ye prove the
sooth. So when Sir Bors and his fellows came to his bed they found him
stark dead, and he lay as he had smiled, and the sweetest savour about
him that ever they felt.

Then was there weeping and wringing of hands, and the greatest dole
they made that ever made men. And on the morn the Bishop did his mass
of Requiem, and after, the Bishop and all the nine knights put Sir
Launcelot in the same horse bier that Queen Guenever was laid in to-fore
that she was buried. And so the Bishop and they all together went with
the body of Sir Launcelot daily, till they came to Joyous Gard; and ever
they had an hundred torches brenning about him. And so within fifteen
days they came to Joyous Gard. And there they laid his corpse in the
body of the quire, and sang and read many psalters and prayers over him
and about him.

And ever his visage was laid open and naked, that all folks might behold
him. For such was the custom in those days, that all men of worship
should so lie with open visage till that they were buried. And right
thus as they were at their service, there came Sir Ector de Maris, that
had seven years sought all England, Scotland, and Wales, seeking his
brother, Sir Launcelot.



CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Ector found Sir Launcelot his brother dead, and
how Constantine reigned next after Arthur; and of the end of this book.


AND when Sir Ector heard such noise and light in the quire of Joyous
Gard, he alighted and put his horse from him, and came into the quire,
and there he saw men sing and weep. And all they knew Sir Ector, but he
knew not them. Then went Sir Bors unto Sir Ector, and told him how
there lay his brother, Sir Launcelot, dead; and then Sir Ector threw
his shield, sword, and helm from him. And when he beheld Sir Launcelot's
visage, he fell down in a swoon. And when he waked it were hard any
tongue to tell the doleful complaints that he made for his brother. Ah
Launcelot, he said, thou were head of all Christian knights, and now
I dare say, said Sir Ector, thou Sir Launcelot, there thou liest, that
thou were never matched of earthly knight's hand. And thou were the
courteoust knight that ever bare shield. And thou were the truest friend
to thy lover that ever bestrad horse. And thou were the truest lover of
a sinful man that ever loved woman. And thou were the kindest man that
ever struck with sword. And thou were the goodliest person that ever
came among press of knights. And thou was the meekest man and the
gentlest that ever ate in hall among ladies. And thou were the sternest
knight to thy mortal foe that ever put spear in the rest. Then there was
weeping and dolour out of measure.

Thus they kept Sir Launcelot's corpse aloft fifteen days, and then they
buried it with great devotion. And then at leisure they went all with
the Bishop of Canterbury to his hermitage, and there they were together
more than a month. Then Sir Constantine, that was Sir Cador's son of
Cornwall, was chosen king of England. And he was a full noble knight,
and worshipfully he ruled this realm. And then this King Constantine
sent for the Bishop of Canterbury, for he heard say where he was. And
so he was restored unto his Bishopric, and left that hermitage. And Sir
Bedivere was there ever still hermit to his life's end. Then Sir Bors de
Ganis, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Gahalantine, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin,
Sir Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Villiars le Valiant, Sir Clarrus of
Clermont, all these knights drew them to their countries. Howbeit King
Constantine would have had them with him, but they would not abide in
this realm. And there they all lived in their countries as holy men.
And some English books make mention that they went never out of England
after the death of Sir Launcelot, but that was but favour of makers. For
the French book maketh mention, and is authorised, that Sir Bors, Sir
Ector, Sir Blamore, and Sir Bleoberis, went into the Holy Land thereas
Jesu Christ was quick and dead, and anon as they had stablished their
lands. For the book saith, so Sir Launcelot commanded them for to do,
or ever he passed out of this world. And these four knights did many
battles upon the miscreants or Turks. And there they died upon a Good
Friday for God's sake.

_Here is the end of the book of King Arthur, and of his noble knights
of the Round Table, that when they were whole together there was ever
an hundred and forty. And here is the end of the death of Arthur. I pray
you all, gentlemen and gentlewomen that readeth this book of Arthur and
his knights, from the beginning to the ending, pray for me while I am
alive, that God send me good deliverance, and when I am dead, I pray
you all pray for my soul. For this book was ended the ninth year of the
reign of King Edward the Fourth, by Sir Thomas Maleore, knight, as Jesu
help him for his great might, as he is the servant of Jesu both day and
night._

_Thus endeth this noble and joyous book entitled Le Morte Darthur.
Notwithstanding it treateth of the birth, life, and acts of the said
King Arthur, of his noble knights of the Round Table, their marvellous
enquests and adventures, the achieving of the Sangreal, and in the end
the dolorous death and departing out of this world of them all. Which
book was reduced into English by Sir Thomas Malory, knight, as afore is
said, and by me divided into twenty-one books, chaptered and emprinted,
and finished in the abbey, Westminster, the last day of July the year of
our Lord MCCCCLXXX{?}._

_Caxton me fieri fecit._

